BUSINESS IDEAS


RECYCLING CONTAINERS
Type A: Fit on a bike carrier
	maybe with a strap to turn two into a saddle bag
Tybe B: Fit on a small trolley
	maybe convertable to shopping or other trolley
Labels for what they are
Made of recycled plastic
One with a lid and funnel for oil
TODO: Watch people recycling to see their struggles or ideas

		

AIRBNB HELP
fast review app
stickers
guide book



CUSTOM DOG FOOD
dog food with added ingredients to help with health /breed issues



DOG CAGE FOR CARS
Similar to 4pets - Can size based on theirs and use their data about which size car it fits
https://www.galaxus.ch/en/s15/product/4pets-entkalker-vehicle-accessories-for-pets-8393137?gclid=Cj0KCQjw8rT8BRCbARIsALWiOvSWI-w0_2zxfh3GhKcqv2rtBM6Kz-TZNhpekdYkPUCH7EjWXhms4QUaAnj4EALw_wcB&gclsrc=aw.ds
They rattleproof evey joint with plastic coupler

Plastic parts:
	3D Printed would be an option, but possibly prohibitively expensive for now
	Low pressure injection molding using heated molds seems very possible. Induction for heating and water for cooling seems interesting - for some details see https://www.ptonline.com/articles/Hot-Cold-Injection-Molding-Which-Approach-Is-Best-for-You  

Design Details:
	In general, reducing the possibility for rattling is very important. Metal to metal should be avoided.
	A compliant mechanism for the door lock could be interesting - reducing part count and rattling

No lock on door of cage:
 	cheaper to make and 
 	safer in case of accidents - less likely to trap dog
 	no need to lock the dog anyway since car is lockable

Gap under cage:
 	Purpose. Allows a ramp to slide under, for older or smaller dogs
 	Maybe ramp could be built in somehow to the cage (tricky though, as boot depth would vary a lot)
 	Ramp could be folded in 2 when stowed and then unfolded in use. Allows longer ramp in smaller space
 	Could be optional, by adding feet under existing cage corner joints
 	Requires stronger base to not flex, or bracing either side of ramp

 Bed:
 	May not be necessary, as owner could supply
 	Could be suspended rather than stuffed for chew proofness. Like this, but brobably takes up too much height: https://k9ballistics.com/products/chew-proof-armored-rip-stop-elevated-dog-bed
 	Should be washable, or not need washing
 	Kevlar seemed like a good iddea, but apparently the fibers are dangerous in cases where the dog eats them



RETURNABLES
returnable reusable packaging etc.
anything a company uses as part of the delivery process can be left outside to be collected on a particular day
goods are returned to a central facility and sorted
companies can then pick them up to reuse them



CHRISTMAS PUDDING
make christmas puddings
buy ingredients abroad


POT WATCHER
RPI pot watcher using AI to let you know boiling, bubbling, simmering etc.
FURTHER DEV - induction hob which interacts with pot watcher to allw controlled simmering, boiling etc


MEAL PREPPER
Prepped bulk meals for people training


BONSAI TREES
Sheds full of bonsai trees somewhere, automatically watered 
20 yrs later - 800CHF each


LARGE CERAMIC TABLES IN THE STYLE OF BENOIT VIAENE


LARGE CAST RECYCLED PLASTIC TABLES


GEO GURU
Similar to seterra, but with a lot of social media
Youtube videos of best players - country records, state records, worldwide state records, outline records
Tiktok to grab users, get them to the site, get them to youtube
Competitions for schools to encourage them to get students in


PLAYGROUNDS
https://www.kukukschweiz.ch/planen-und-gestalten/materialien.html - robinia wood (black locust)


SANDWICHES
egg sando
katsu sando
katsu wagyu
softshell crab
fondue
croque msr
cheese toastie - see https://www.instagram.com/thecheesetruck/?hl=en for ideas
falafel
shawarma
everything from All antico vinaio https://www.allanticovinaio.com/il-menu-firenze_en/


PLANTS IN OFFICES
Supply plants to offices. The office workers enjoy the plants - health benefits etc.
As plants grow they increase in value, and can be sold after a few years at a profit, while occurring no overheads as no floor space / nursery space is required. 
So, it's a win/win
Use relatively high value, hard to kill plants. Monstera, Bonsai etc.
Have a reasonable number of large office customers, so many plants can be visited at a time. e.g. 20 Large offices with 100 plants each


POTTERY
Series of pottery with Jpanase Enso circles
Series of pottery in the style of simple curved origami. Like the 1 fold origami. Google "simple origami curved" for ideas

ART
https://www.instagram.com/reel/Ci5vn7dugCG/?igshid=YmMyMTA2M2Y= Tree trunk prints	

CHAIRS
Rungs and parts painted slightly different shades to add some interest


LIONS MANE MUSHROOM SUPPLEMENTS
Help brain, memory. 
Or grow them - 
	https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=il9Ij5Y4TSc
	https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=417Qbwn9yso

PLANT POTS WITH BASE LIKE SPRING FORM TIN; TO MAKE REPOTTING EASIER ( FOR BIG PLANTS MAINLY)
	https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RD7y59grK3U


KIDS BOOK
The Rhino that didn't like No. A stubborn young rhino always wants to get his way - mostly he gets put in his place by his parents, but one day he doesn't give up and somehow saves the day.
Illustrations via midjourney V4 or higher


VACUUM RAMP
Custom ramps for vacuum cleaner robots
Fixings - mounting button (search tow rax) or pin
Some kind of screw like shower curtain, to make it a friction fit


UNSELLABLE CLONE
Do something similar to unsellable - buying worthless NFTs in exchange for receipts that can be used for tax purposes
Name - Something with acronym NFT...notfuckingtaxable.com, nofuckingtax...com
how to sell 


KNIFE SHARPENER
Similar to wicked edge, but cheaper
Features:
	Off center stone holding, to allow better edge polishing
	Jaws might have padded jaws e.g. leather or rubber, although this needs to be thin. Better grip, and on need to protect the knife
	If unpadded, aluminium is probably good - it is used for soft jaws in vices due to its softness
	Griping faces of jaws should maybe have a slight curve, to ensure contact with the knife is like this 
	 |
	(|)
	 |
	I like the double sided nature of wicked edge. Some extra expense obviously, but no messing with the knife during the sharpening. Plus it means alternating sides with each stroke which seems optimal
	Clamp idea 1: A thumb wheel, similar to belt tensioner on 3D printer, connected to a wire arrangement which has a Y shape (top two prongs connect to either clamp side and bottom to tensioner)
	Clamp idea 2: Thumb wheel with threaded rod coming out either side. Nuts on the threaded rods push the clamp jaws out. (Rod may need to be threaded in opposite directions on either side). Shape of nut and whatever it makes with (i guess some type of recess) needs to ensure allow for jaw pivot and to stop nut rotating. Compasses like faber caastell stream have exactly this.	

Advanced version:
	Foot pedal, via bike cable to pull. Possibly 2 separate wires (one from each jaw) the whole way to the pedal, to allow a bit of left to right finessing with foot pressure to ensure blade is vertical. Maybe this is a bad idea though and single cable is better?
	Blade aligners, similar to wicked edge but on outside of one jaw, so large knives always rest in same position


BIKE STAND
Bike needs to be positionable in height, around vertical axis, around horizontal axis from clamp through pole
Along the lines of https://www.efficientvelo.com/tools/ez-lift-repair-stand
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iul032uk11c

	LIFT MECHANISM
		Maybe with electric lift. Wireless with buttons on clamp?
		Or gas lift?
		Why? Aimed at electric bikes, weight is much higer than non electric
		Could even run off battery if life was good enough, then no need for cabling over shop floor. 
		A wire pulley lift similar to efficient velo, but looped up around the top pulley, then the whole way down through the tube and out a hole in the bottom where it connects to a winch. In this case it would be good if the rotation locking mechanism around the central post was separate the height lock (maybe there would be no hight lock?) - what you don't want is somebody winching when the rotation is locked. Alternatively, have a very light power lift, or a torque limiter so it doesn't matter. 

	LOCKING/UNLOCKING AXIAL MOVEMENT
		Maybe everything could be done by footpedals - releasing twist in axis 1 and axis 2, 
		Adjustable locking handles from mcmaster carr might be useful - https://youtu.be/2dxCAHU_xpY?t=537 (https://www.mcmaster.com/locking-handles/heavy-duty-adjustable-handles/)

	POLE
		How precise does it need to be to work with bushings?

	BUSHINGS
	    How to press fit - https://www.instagram.com/p/Bs_hP3xh96H/
	    Video on making bushings https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iXB42bKMkHY	

	EXTRAS
		Mat - maybe could have a work mat as an option with a cutout the size of the base


DAVES DONUTS
Make donuts according to recipes from St Johns Bakery - see PDF Bread Cake Doughnut Pudding, by Justin Gellatly.pdf in google drive cookbooks	
Googling for youtube videos, there are lots showing korean donut production, high volume efficient production
Most show hand balling which seems tedious, but this one uses a balling machine - https://youtu.be/kbm3n9xhR0g?t=309	
Flipping when frying - maybe a metal loop on a metal stem (lollipop shape) that could dip in between the doghnuts, slide part of the way over the donut, then pull up to flip
Cutting slots - oscillating saw, like Fein. Or correct length very sharp knife
https://www.youtube.com/shorts/sEaoVaXr41Y has some automation clips
SELLING: direct from a mini stall, at basel, bern, geneva, zurich hb. Or through small - medium chain fast food type restaurants