EDGAR PAYNE

COMPOSITION of
OUTDOOR PAINTING

PREFACE

The most important ally in the study of painting is the art of thinking.

Excepting natural talent or genius, individuality in
thought is, without a doubt, the greatest single factor in
creative work.

Mindful of this idea, I have sought to stress its
importance by setting forth suggestions that may encourage
individual thought in the mind of the student.

According to most authorities, constructive ideas of art,
or any other subject for that matter, are best developed by
their transition through several minds. “Originality is but old
thought made over.”

The forms of composition and other principles of art
set forth in the following pages are those generally accepted
by most painters. These principles are not the property of
anyone but belong to all. Other suggestions are the result of
my own opinions, based on study, experimentation and
practice. Yet even in these, I lay no claim to originality as
most of the ideas have been expressed, perhaps in different
words, by others.

I have endeavored to bring out the main essentials and
their contributing factors as clearly as possible according to
my own way of thinking. In doing so, I am fully aware of the
difficulties of teaching art through the printed word. As
Harold Speed has said in essence that writing on art is much
like writing about the taste of a particular food — one
person may define a certain taste in one manner, and almost
everyone else describes it differently.

Owing to the abstract nature of art and its fundamental
principles, it is impossible to define either with any degree of
exactness. Therefore, only an indirect approach may be used.
This also has drawbacks as, in discussing both immediate
and remote factors, thought may lead far away from the

Vii
PREFACE

point in question. Therefore, I ask the reader to consider
always the principle involved or the main idea of the partic-
ular point under discussion.

Composing is not an element to be considered alone but
demands the study and application of all factors in art.
Creating pictorial unity and creating a fine panting is one
and the same thing.

The principle of judgment or activity between forces or
influences is an old one which may be applied to most any
subject. Many philosophical writers frequently call attention
to it. Its authenticity is based on its universal acceptance.
I feel that it is particularly important and very applicable
to procedure in art, since it offers logical analysis without
committing such analysis to rigid exactness or unreasonable
limitation in any other direction.

Each must have his own judgments and mannerisms and
every picture its own measures of influence. No law can
restrict all artists to one rule or all paintings to one measure
or quantity. Hence, giving proper instruction to each
individual student is the most difficult of problems. Methods
of teaching him to think or develop his own viewpoint are
practically non-existent. Scarce, too, are the means which
will prevent him from falling into the dangerous habit of
attempting to use suggestions as rules or methods to
construct pictures. Again, there is no sure way of getting
the beginner to use suggestion in training or disciplining
himself to the point where he can use his own instinctive
taste and judgment to suit each individual painting.

Two important facts should stand out strongly in the
mind of both the student and his adviser. The first, that no
one can give to another any creative powers. The student
must have natural ability, the genius to adapt is as well as the
perseverance and determination to succeed. The second, that
the goal in painting should never be the picture but the
means which produce it.

Art is always in the procedure — its manifestation in the
ultimate result.

There are always many who expect each book on art
to set forth an actual plan that may be applied in the

Vill
PREFACE

construction of pictures. I have purposely kept away from
this idea because I firmly believe that holding the study to the
accumulation of knowledge is the first consideration. True,
practice —- much of it — is essential, yet knowledge precedes
this. No one can successfully handle pigment unless he
knows why he is handling it.

I believe further that all fine creative work is built upon
previous thought and accomplishment, proven truths and
principles, coupled with new ideas, theories and mannerisms.

If one followed altogether only that which has been
done and has no new ideas, art would indeed fail and become
merely a poor imitation of existing work. New thought is
essential, yet, this considered alone, all truths and principles
set aside, results would be equally disastrous and lead
entirely to eccentricity, idiosyncrasy, and eventually to
demoralization as far as true artistic quality is concerned.

While talent and genius sometimes weigh measures,
apparently beyond reason, nevertheless there is some logic,
studied purposeful effort and self-discipline in the study and
practice of art. As George Eliott says: “Nothing will give
permanent success in any enterprise in life, except native
ability cultivated by honest and persevering effort. Genius is
often but the capacity for receiving and improving by
discipline.” Without at least some logic, discipline could
hardly be exercised. Reason and tradition guide natural
instincts, yet they must never encroach too far upon the
latter. The often-quoted touch of madness in genius is but
the throwing off of a possible over-influence of tradition and
conventions. The question is, how far can this be done and
art still fulfill its purpose?

Theoretically, acquired knowledge or the influence of
principles, should integrate as a part of natural ability,
become as one, so to speak. Actually, painting is a matter of
working between to two forces. It is doubtful if one could
continually work without now and then referring to the
authority of principles.

The study of paintings is important to the student.
Nothing aids him more than development of appreciation.
Real enjoyment of artistic merit is the greatest possible
PREFACE

incentive to its creation. Existing work also establishes
precedents and authenticates ideas or principles and fortifies
convictions. While art in individual examples of painting
transcends all governing influences, principles in turn,
transcend all schools of painting.

Outside of a few slight references, I have refrained from
mentioning trends in art. I think it is better to bring out and
stress the main essentials and their contributing factors —
those fundamentals which determine artistic quality —
rather than making an attempt to describe various schools of
artistic thought. When the student has acquired some
knowledge of principles, he can make his own analysis and
develop appreciation of works which are built upon these
fundamentals and not waste his time on others that have no
basis in elementary principles.

In study, theory or practice, knowledge is undoubtedly
the keynote to individual thought and originality in painting.

To those who are looking for suggestions which might
aid them in developing their own ideas, skill or appreciation,
this little volume is fraternally presented.

Edgar Alwin Payne
CONTENTS

CHAPTER I. | Page 1
THE APPROACH TO ART

Origin and Purpose of Art — Talent and Genius —

Elementary Principles — Originality —- Freedom in

Expression — Opposition of Influences — The Artistic
Composite — Rules — Their Place and Purpose —
Imagination and Emotional Impulses — Nature —
Abstract and Visual Quality — Knowledge and
Discipline —- The Mental Approach — Enthusiasm —
Direct and Remote Influences.

CHAPTER II. Page 27
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

Selection —- High Ideals Important — Improper
Motives — Simplicity — Unequal Measures — Natural
Composition — Rearrangement — The View Finder —
Balance — Mistakes in Composing — Discouragement
— Preliminary Sketches — Pencil Notes — Several
Sketches of the Same Subject — Composition —
Overworking the Composition — Breadth and
Simplicity — Errors in Arrangement — Hills and
Mountains — Trees — Clouds and Marines — Boats —
Main Interest in Composition — Figures and Animals
— Drawing — Mass Principle — Decorative Approach
— Linear Design — Perspective — Station Point of the
Artist — Horizon Line — Vanishing Points — Other
Factors in Perspective — Values — Range of Values —
Outdoors Compared to Pigment — Restricted Tonal
Scale — Interchange — Its Value — Color — Balance

xi
CONTENTS

CHAPTER II continued Page 27
— Harmony — Spectrum — Experimenting with
Primary Colors — Predominating Tint or Shade —

Grays — Difference in the Intensity of Color Outdoors
and Pigment — The Palette — Rhythm —- Rhythm a
State of Mind — Rhythm in Nature — Visual Rhythm
in the Picture — Repetition — Repetition of Line Form
and Color.

CHAPTER III. Page 105
TYPES OF COMPOSITION

Compositional Symbols or Stems — The Steelyard —
The Balance Scale — The O, or Circle — The S, or
Compound Curve — The Pyramid or Triangle — The
Cross — The Radiating or Converging Line — The Ell
or Rectangular — The Suspended Steelyard — The
Three Spot — Group Mass — The Diagonal Line —
The Tunnel or Tunnel-Like — The Silhouette — The
Pattern.

CHAPTER IV CONCLUSION Page 129

ADDENDA Page 141

xil
REPRODUCTIONS OF PAINTINGS

BEGE ICES 29 2 és ksemanworaenendince e eosin 6 oa marion’ Page 3
By Roy BROWN

THE LOON CALL ......... 0.250.505 ee tees Page 9
By CHARLES S. CHAPMAN

BQUINOCTIAL, 5 ssseww canada wewsine o 4s esis Page 13
By PAUL DOUGHERTY

TOWERING TREES) woe 0 scae 4 emaaie ios s ieee Page 19
By DANIEL GARBER

MYSTERIOUS EMBERS (Moonlight) ......... Page 23
By FRANK TENNEY JOHNSON

A GLIMPSE OF THE SBA. «0... 22062 eee Page 29
By PAULINE PALMER

CONCARNEAU HARBOR ...............45. Page 33
By EDGAR A. PAYNE

CARVERSVILLE BROOK .................- Page 37
By EDWARD REDFIELD

THE GULF ROAD .......... 00... ee ee ees Page 41
By CHAUNCEY F. RYDER

FOG VEILED HEADLANDS................ Page 47
By JACK WILKINSON SMITH

HOME OF THE QUAIL .........2 0. cee Page 51
By WILLIAM WENDT

THE BIG WATER: sis aa vcccwa wceneiseaie « 5 © memiectemuae! « Page 57

By FREDERICK J. WAUGH
PAGES FROM THE AUTHOR’S NOTEBOOKS Page 61
OUTDOOR SKETCHES BY THE AUTHOR Page 67

xiii
PLATE

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE
THREE EXAMPLES OF VARYING OR
REARRANGING SUBJECT ......0 00000 e ee eee cues 69
PICTORIAL DESIGNS BY EUROPEAN ARTISTS ....... 73
. COMPOSITION BY AMERICAN ARTISTS ............ 74
ARRANGEMENT OF PICTURE DESIGN,
EUROPEAN ARTISTS 4 si sd edeseaas asa 8 s eewew 75
PICTORIAL PLANS, AMERICAN ARTISTS ........-. 76
. COMPOSITION BY AMERICAN ARTISTS ..........45 77

. SELECTING PART OF THE VIEW — INTERCHANGE .. 83

« BEEEGTING MASSES + a+ canrenimnea ce ea eaiewion 87
THINGS TO BE AVOIDED IN COMPOSING .......... 89
IDEAS FOR ALTERATION OR SELECTION .......... 93

. SIGNIFICANCE OF VARIOUS ITEMS IN COMPOSING .. 97

. VARIOUS ITEMS IN COMPOSING .............005- 99
. IMPROVISED PICTORIAL IDEAS ..............-4- 103
. SUGGESTIONS FOR DESIGN ............--222-5: 107
. BoaT ARRANGEMENTS ......... 000 cee eeeeeees 111
COMPOSITIONS OF SEA AND SEACOAST .......... 112
FORMS OF COMPOSITION- A ... 0.2... 2 eee eee 117
FORMS OF COMPOSITION—B.............--45- 118
. FORMS OF COMPOSITION —C............000005 119
. FORMS OF COMPOSITION—D ............00055 120

Golor:Relationships « escawwaa eee e sas exemnean 147

xiv
COMPOSITION OF
OUTDOOR PAINTING

CHAPTER I
THE APPROACH TO ART

ORIGIN AND PURPOSE

All creative endeavor is toward a definite purpose.
Therefore, it is imperative that we have a definite conception
of this purpose as well as a clear understanding of the
means that accomplish this end. Quality in fine pictures is
dependent on a knowledge and a respect for the elements
which create it. Actually a fine painting is a composite of all
its factors and influences. Bringing these together, to form
this composite, creates the process of composing. Hence the
study of composition is a matter of studying art and all of its
factors and influences.

That art is entirely an abstract or invisible element and
true artistic procedure seeks to conceal governing influences
means we cannot approach the subject directly but must go
back to the beginning and look into the purpose of artistic
expression or the reason for its being. Then search out, study
and analyze each factor or principle having either remote or
direct bearing on origin, theory or practice.

Robert Henri once said that art is not actually intended
but is the result of a desire to express, and a need for appre-
ciation. To these factors may be added the enjoyment of
nature and an instinctive desire to excel. A desire to excel or
attain perfection is the inevitable result of creative effort.
The competitive or idealizing sprit undoubtedly plays an
important part in picturization.

Idealizing comes from the love of beauty and enjoyment
in its translation, also the desire to translate and create a
THE APPROACH TO ART

quality that will give the utmost degree of enjoyment to
others. The love of beauty in nature and in creative work is
instinctive and fundamental in each individual.

Whether the interest in picturization is that of the
humble, the unlearned or the cultured esthete, pictures fill
a definite need.

Sir John Gilbert says, “A room with pictures and a
room without pictures differ nearly as much as a room with
windows and a room without windows; for pictures are
loopholes of escape to the soul, leading it to other scenes and
spheres, where the fancy for a moment may revel, refreshed
and delighted. Pictures are consolers of loneliness, and a
relief to the jaded mind, and windows to the
imprisoned thought; they are books, histories and sermons
— which we can read without the trouble of turning over
the leaves.”

Mankind needs distraction from the material and
commonplace things of life. We seek solace in those things
which bring peace to the mind and relaxation to the body.
More than all, we desire through the expression of feelings
and emotions understanding with our fellow beings.

Long before houses were built, primitive man not only
sought express himself pictorially, but realized also the
need for receptive appreciation. Therefore he left visible
records on the walls of caves and in the sheltered crevices of
cliffs. In his relaxation from struggles with wild animals and
his enemies, the prehistoric artist responded to natural
instincts which called for needs beyond shelter and
sustenance. With his crude tools and limited knowledge, he
had ample opportunity to exercise his ingenuity; and so in
order to better his expression he set about devising new tools
and other innovations. He sought ochres and carbons to fill
in his crude outline drawings, then soon began to practice
simple shading, modeling and relating objects.

At first the early pictorialist knew little of organization
or combining several ideas to express a larger one and
usually depicted one item for each idea. Later he found
BY PERMISSION OF THE ARTIST

BLUE HILLS

By Roy BROWN

cc Simplicity is an outstanding quality of this pictorial plan. All the main values are
embodied in four areas, the foreground, the trees, the distance, and the sky. The circle type
of design is the predominant influence. The circular route of eye travel embraces the larger
part of the canvas. This gives a distinct value to any picture. A good example of line oppo-
sition is revealed here. The strong verticals of the tree trunks is well intercepted by the mass
of foliage and opposed by the strong line of the foreground as well as by the more subtle
contours of the hills. One main opening with two lesser exits for the eye shows well the

principles of repetition and one definite exit.
THE APPROACH TO ART

that by relating the objects drawn, broader ideas could be
revealed. If a wild boar, deer or buffalo were pictured, each
carried the idea of that animal, but if a man with
a spear were added, the relation produced broader
significance. Combining several items to convey a message
then became, probably, one of the first general principles
in art. As time went on other elementary factors were
developed.

Through the ages, subsequent artists kept up the
progression by new ideas, new principles and new modes of
expression. Thus the institution of art has been maintained
by virtue of the talents, innovations and accomplishments of
all contributing artists.

TALENT AND GENIUS

Talent is naturally the first thing to be considered in
any analysis of art. Without it any other qualifications are
worthless. Talent represents an inherent instinct of adapta-
tion or native ability, while genius is the power to utilize and
integrate all imaginative faculties and practical ideas. Genius
also creates the force of perseverance and determination.
Sir Joshua Reynolds puts it this way: “Genius is supposed
to be a power of producing excellencies which are out of
reach of the rules of art; a power which no precepts can
teach, and which no industry can acquire.”

Although opinions on art and its principles may
differ, it is invariably agreed that talent and genius cannot
be acquired, that both are essential to creative work and
that all artistic work comes primarily from these inherent
faculties.

Talent comes into being with the individual. Everyone
who comes to earth has some creative ability, and among
these are some that have exceptional adaptability to express
in special forms. Those who lean toward pictorial work
begin early to draw and observe all that has to do with
this medium of expression. Their first renderings were
perhaps the simplest ideas expressed with only crude draw-
ings and elementary colors. No doubt but at one time in
THE APPROACH TO ART

childhood every great artist has depicted in much the
same manner.

A curious fact along this line is that a similar method —
a simple outline of objects filled with a few colors is used by
primitive men and children. In the work of both groups there
is often evidence of the divine spark of originality. Then too,
their picturization often reveals a simplicity — a naive
manner of expression which is a vital factor in the work of
any era or period. The big problem of instruction in art is
to preserve these inherent natural powers. Other lines of
education presents the same problem. No one can give any
new powers the student. All that can be done is to show him
how he may develop his natural abilities. This is much easier
said than done.

While. talent or genius must exist, at best they are
merely embryonic factors and no one can guide these
into productive artistry without the initiative, perseverance
and determination of the student. To say that the artist
is born and not made, is only partly true. Actually, while
it is an important qualification, there is no proof of real
worth in talent until it has been developed and expanded
by a tremendous amount of serious study and plain
hard work.

ELEMENTARY PRINCIPLES

The elementary principles of art are but general broad
ideas resulting from the origin and purpose of art, the
thought, analysis and experience of artists, philosophers and
other thinkers. These elementary principles are authentic
guidance, yet are flexible and capable of unlimited variation,
although their origin is in facts, truths and natural laws,
which are more inflexible.

New ideas, rules and mannerisms are equally important
— they are the progressive instruments — yet temporary and
only expedients for the individual painters and individual
pictures. But, truths and principles are the stabilizing
permanent foundation. They never change or progress but
THE APPROACH TO ART

remain eternally the same and form a basis in fact for exer-
cising individuality.

Originality in art is not a matter of trying to invent
new principles but is a matter of creating new modes or
mannerisms based on artistic fundamentals. New principles
are only developed during a century or more of time and
then only after many minds have evolved the main ideas of
such principles. Before they are accepted as principles, new
main ideas in art must be subjected to every test including
that of time. Additionally, major innovations must integrate
with the elementary principles of origin and always be
based on natural laws. Truth must lie at the foundation of all
constructive ideas in art. Thought, like art, is a continuous
progression. Often, in our vanity we think we are strictly
original in our ideas, when, as a matter of fact, we have only
borrowed or built upon thoughts that have been handed
down from the past.

The main principles of art have been originated or
preempted long ago by others. Consequently, it is only by
studying the wisdom in these accepted principles and
traditions that we can guide our thoughts along constructive
lines. Emerson says: “Many ideas grow better when
transplanted into another mind than in the one where they
sprung up.”

In order to stimulate thought, the inventive and
imaginative powers, and encourage original viewpoints, the
art should be continually studied. Upon these the beginner
may mold his own growing convictions. Sound ideas are the
basis of all creative work. So, to begin properly, the student
should be encouraged to form his own concepts. He should
however be sure these concepts are not imitative or incapable
of being applied in a practical way. His success or failure
will depend on the soundness of his own conclusions
during the formative period. “As the twig bends, so shall the
limb grow.”

Whatever theories the beginner adopts, he will do well
to remember that independence in thought, guided by a
THE APPROACH TO ART

consideration for fundamental principles and nature is the
safest road to individuality. He should also remember
originality consists mainly in a respect for tradition and
precedents, by accepting other men’s ideas, then using
personal invention in coordinating these with his own.

To be original one needs to learn the ideas of other
painters in order to be different from them.

The primordial base of art is its elementary principles.
These are the inevitable consequence of the desire and need
for betterment and progress. Principles are broad, abstract
instruments which combine with a certain measure of
reason to guide imagination, invention and emotional
impulses as well as skill in the manipulation of drawing
mediums and paints.

The desire to express, to excel or idealize; the enjoyment
of nature; the love of beauty; and talent or genius are
elemental factors in the origin of art. The artist must also
have other qualifications such as active imagination, strong
inventive faculties, independence in thought, initiative,
determination and perseverance. Additionally he needs a fine
appreciation of quality, originality, together with distinct
mannerisms in translating or creating quality, both visual
and abstract. This means a worthwhile idea in concept and
finesse or skill in manipulating drawing mediums and paints.
A respect for nature, traditions, conventions and principles
should always be in order.

A painter needs to study, meditate, experiment and
practice interminably.

The painting requires nobility in its concept, variety,
rhythm, repetition, unity, balance and harmony in its
composition. The drawing needs general accuracy,
approximate proportion of form or mass and direction of
line. Values and modeling require proper sequences and
graduations, color, balance and harmony. Perspective or
recession 1s essential.

These elements form the composite background for
artistic rendering. Some of these factors are analogous and
THE APPROACH TO ART

some are embraced in the larger principles. Yet consideration
for all is needed in a full pictorial representation. Inside all,
and between some of these factors or principles, instinctive
judgment in selecting the measures, quantities or influences
of each is necessary for different problems. All of the factors,
influences or principles are elastic and capable of much
variation. None of them can restrict beyond a reasonable
degree. Another great principle remains — that of freedom
or artistic leeway.

The artist demands that his imagination and creative
powers have minimum restraint. Freedom in expression is
the factor that defends natural expression and determines
originality. Yet at best, the phrase is merely a conventional
term intended to illustrate a principle; albeit an important
one if considered in its rightful meaning.

“Liberty under law” is not only an axiom of both
democracy and of art, but also an essential of each. It is
doubtful if any civilized person could live happily or do
worthwhile creative work without exercising a reasonable
degree of freedom. A reasonable degree means a respect for
other elementary principles.

Each free government is build upon a code of principles
which upholds and guarantees a certain degree of freedom
for its nationals. These principles are in turn supported by
conventional rule or Jaw. The institution of art has come
down through the ages by the same process. Progress in any
line is dependent upon observance of the entire code of laws
or principles. Freedom is only freedom when it is guided by
respect for other conventions.

Both in government and in art the great question is,
how much personal liberty shall be subordinated to the
conventional rule or law of the main institution, or how far
can these be set aside for personal freedom? The question is
unanswerable. However the problem does furnish proof of
the dependence of one principle on others. Freedom in
expressing pictorially needs to respect nature and natural
expression on the one end, and elementary principles and
traditions on the other.
SO aaa ET aa a

BY PERMISSION OF THE GRAND CENTRAL GALLERIES, NEW YORK

THE LOON CALL

By CHARLES S. CHAPMAN

Q Here is a good example of the decorative influence in painting, yet a decorative
style that respects nature. (Note the well drawn figure). The pattern type is the main
constructions stem used. It is combined however with the S or compound curve. The latter
can be seen along the lines of the stream, waterfall and the tree trunk in the distance.
The first great quality in Mr. Chapman's canvases is his very unusual color harmonies,
the second is a distinct and different technique. The unique craftsmanship in this artist's
work is the result of many years of research and experiment. Such continual effort should

be an example for every ambitious student.
THE APPROACH TO ART
OPPOSITION OF INFLUENCES

At the basis of all things there is energy, activity or
power — call it what you will — that is produced between
opposing forces. We have poles of positive and negative
electricity. Water and fire create energy through steam. In
the words of Pythagoras, “If there be light then there is
darkness; if cold, then heat; if height, depth also; if solid,
then fluid; hardness and softness; calm and tempest;
prosperity and adversity.” Almost everything has its oppo-
site. Between these ends is created a vitalizing third
element that gives life, balance or rhythm.

This principle is evident in the origin, purpose, theory,
practice, in fact all phases of art. The intuitive judging
between influences may be said to be the basis for abstract
quality.

In the reasons of origin, theoretically we set a pattern or
an ideal which in this instance is equivalent to the adage, “art
for art’s sake.” In other words, the objective is figuratively the
pleasure of depicting. However, being firstly humans and
secondly artists, we actually anticipate subsequent satisfac-
tion in achievement or approbation from competent critics,
or even (soft pedal) pecuniary gain. Between these desires
comes the opportunity to test the artistic sensibilities of the
painter. Like all processes in art, this is a matter of balance
and counterbalance. In nearly all other instances the greater
influence may be either factor, though in this case the more
powerful force should be the enjoyment of painting. This
represents activity and production, while satisfaction of
attainment denotes repose or reward.

However, having tasted the fruits of labor or the reward,
and the taste being good, the artist may tarry and rest too long
on his oars. Consequently, pleasure in depiction might be
hampered by remembrance of tasteful fruit. The main object
of the painter should be to fully enjoy the means of obtaining
his visual expression and, in turn, enjoy the satisfaction of a
work well done; then consider the latter an incentive or means
to even greater pleasure in his next picturization.

10
THE APPROACH TO ART

Perhaps one of the most important pairs of opposites
is natural talent or native ability on one end and principles
or conventions on the other. The proper balance of
influence between these two ends may be productive of
fine artistic results, while an improper measure could spell
disaster.

Other opposing factors may be considered; for example,
the conscious and subconscious mind. The former has to
do with the more factual things and the latter with the
more abstract elements. The conscious mind denotes reason,
truth, facts, and is concerned with the things we learn, while
the subconscious indicates instinct or the influence of
natural impulses. We say that art is purely the result of
subconscious guidance, merely to illustrate the principle
of an ideal circumstance. It is very doubtful if anyone could
use any physical activity without conscious thought.
Certainly if we should be unconscious of physical control,
physical action would hardly be possible. Moreover, any
kind of an injury might result. Without a doubt some
reason or a certain degree of conscious guidance is needed
to balance the subconscious impulses and other purely
abstract influences.

In painting from nature the artist is faced with the
problem of judging between the influence of realism and
the power of his artistic ingenuity. The latter leads him to the
extreme of imagination, while nature counteracts by
demanding a respect for her truths.

Compositional arrangements require balance between
large masses and detail. Drawing requires balance of
straight, vertical, horizontal and curved lines; equalization
between contrasts and subtle nuances of values is needed.
Color requires contrasts or complements and harmonious
analogies. Unequal measures in the light and shaded parts of
objects are essential for artistic balance.

The opposition between two or more influences never
suggests the extent of measures, but it does emphasize the
fact that art is not the product wholly of one thing or another,

1]
THE APPROACH TO ART

but is always the result of composite influences. This is a
simple statement. It has tremendous significance.

The whole procedure of appreciation, study, concept
and actual painting is a matter of working between the
influence of various factors. Just how much each shall influ-
ence is something that no one can say. The judgment must
always come from the individual, and even he will vary his
taste and decision by subconscious instinct to suit each mood
and circumstance.

Within a composite of influences the mystic charm of
art is born. It comes into being in the abstract interval
between a thought and a reality and no one, not even the
artist, can remeasure the influence that caused it.

RULES

General rules are usually intended to guard against
unsound ideas or practices, in order that appreciation or
the instinctive feeling for unity may be developed. There
are definite pitfalls, and bad habits to be avoided in
composting or painting. Therefore the student needs some
authoritative guidance on which to depend when his judgment
is inadequate.

The use of conventional rules to call attention to
principles is the only method of training the intuitive
judgment to avoid errors that spoil balance or harmony.
Rules are broad enough to aid the student in forming his
own ideas or convictions without hurting his individuality
or originality.

While most convictions or decisions may be subject to
change, there are some that may well remain unalterable. Not
the least and the first among these is the identity of the goal
toward which the study is directed. Naturally, the ultimate
result is the painting.

Nevertheless many students allow themselves to see
only the result and neglect the means of reaching it.
They are like the oversoul, who sees only the bank of

12
BY PERMISSION OF THE MACBETH GALLERIES, NEW YORK

EQUINOCTIAL

By PAUL DOUGHERTY

G The pattern plan is outstanding in this picture although a slight indication of the
circular idea may be seen. Distinctive quality may be seen in the consistency in pigment
handling. Notice the brushwork in the rocks and water. There is variety in both the light
and the dark masses as well as in the edges of form. Yet nature has not been sacrificed to
artistic mannerisms. The lure of the sea, the texture of form and rhythmic outdoor feeling
have been happily combined with those qualities arising from pure artistic ingenuity.

13
THE APPROACH TO ART

the stream to be crossed, without considering how
to cross.

The glamour of any achievement should never over-
shadow the means of producing it. A desire to paint well
should be the desire to perfect all artistic faculties.

It has often been said that art students may do anything
they like in the study and practice of art. This may be true in
one sense. However, a literal translation of this statement
used as a criterion, might prove fallacious. A sensible idea
of the purpose of art and the definition and value of its prin-
ciples, is an asset to any student.

The first thing in the study of art is sound, extensive
knowledge. The next is to know how to apply it.

Some writers on art set forth rather rigid rules to guide
study and practice. Others go so far as to designate artistic
procedure as the science of painting. On the other hand,
many say that rules should be absolutely taboo. Again it has
been stated that “rules are devised for slaves.” Thus we have
opposing beliefs and the intention here is not to condemn
any of these but to show extremes of thought. Somewhere
between these contradicting views a basis for constructive
ideas may be found.

In order to be progressive, many viewpoints are
needed. As a matter of fact, rules considered at the right
time and place are of undoubted worth, rightly used they
can aid greatly in creative work. Considered wrongly,
they may prove to be deceptive as the famed sirens of
Ulysses, leading onto dangerous shoals or even to complete
artistic disaster.

In many activities outside of creative work, definite
rules and formulas may be set up and followed to the letter
of the law. In the case of useful arts and mechanical profes-
sions, absolute adherence to strict laws and methods are
essential to success. Here, one has to do as others in the same
line have done. Not so in creative art. No one can apply the
same rules directly to the painting of each picture without
lessening artistic quality.

14
THE APPROACH TO ART

After all, rules are only conventional terms intended
to prevent grave mistakes and to guide the process along
channels that will produce the maximum quality in each
factor in order that it in turn, will contribute the same
measure to the whole harmony. Rules were never meant to be
formulas for building pictures, but rather, to instruct in the
storing up of knowledge and aiding skill or facility which
may be brought forth later. The first and last purpose of all
rules, traditions and principles is to aid the study, self-
discipline and training toward an intuitive depiction.

IMAGINATION AND THE EMOTIONAL IMPULSES

Imagination is an image-making power common to all.
Its origin is in fact and its end in fantasy; yet a purposeful
fancy guided by at least some measure of reason. Imagination
is the great spring of creative activity — the fountain of artis-
tic fantasies which are the daydreams of children grown up.
Paradoxical as it may seem, the right way to conceive and
practice art, regardless of the degree of efficiency, is with the
viewpoint of a child. From Sir Alfred East comes the
suggestion that we should approach nature for depiction with
the heart and mind of a child. But let this not be construed
to mean that the painter go unprepared, without knowledge,
ability and strength. Mr. East says further, that we must not
become over-awed or grovel before nature, but should stand
up and paint from the shoulder like men.

The artist must have strength as well as emotions,
moreover, he needs to make use of both.

When the artist has schooled and disciplined himself
to the point where he can respond to natural impulses, the
real enjoyment in painting begins. Reason, study, and
experience have taught him the importance of sound
constructive thought and an instinctive feeling for quality or
beauty. A circumstantial state of mind needs to be created
where self assurance aids the sensitive influence of intuition
in judging the proper measures between factors to suit each

15
THE APPROACH TO ART

particular rendition. A feeling for the measures must be
maintained. In singing, writing, and other creative or
interpretive practice, feeling is the keynote. The violinist
does not consciously think of measures on his fret board,
because there are none. He feels each note, its pitch,
vibration and place in the main harmony. So, too, does the
painter. He feels the measures between each influence and
varies their worth to suit each problem in composition.
A feeling for measures in the parts is a feeling for the
entire unity. Such intuitive judgment is the thing that creates
personality or individuality in the work.

Within all of us there is an inner source which sends
forth and receives emotional impulses. Under proper
conditions these impulses influence the appreciation of
nature and her moods. The artist, therefore, is a creature with
exceptional response to emotions, yet at the same time he
must have strength and be fortified with knowledge and
reason. “He who cannot respond to his emotions with some
reasonable guidance is incapable of expressing himself in an
artistic manner.”

Many things enter into or influence the process of
thought which develop the artistic powers; the emotional
impulse is the first and not the least of these. Important as
pigment manipulation may be, it is barren of artistic results
if the training of the mind, natural instincts and emotional
reactions are illy considered.

NATURE

Nature must not be forgotten. The habit of continually
painting outdoor motives from imagination will eventually
produce only “studio pictures” without the feeling of real
outdoor qualities.

Nature is not the least concerned with artistic
attributes, although she has prior claim on the artist and
insists that her qualities receive first attention. If she is
to be represented, she demands that she be not

16
THE APPROACH TO ART

occasionally but often consulted. Otherwise there is liable to
be trouble.

Nature always challenges the capabilities of the
imagination. Her variation in line, form, color and
ever-changing mood is infinitely beyond the variations
resulting purely from invention or imagination.

The human mind has an enormous capacity for storing
knowledge and conceiving ideas, yet is infinitesimally small
compared to nature when it comes to making suggestions
for pictorial expression. Therefore the artist must conclude
that while he needs to assert his artistic powers he must also
recognize and respect nature’s capacity and variety, which is
so much greater than his own.

Though the painter may have the greatest possible
talent, excellent training and most noble ideas or concepts,
he is still dependent, to a very great extent, upon nature.
To her he must go for ideas to be translated. A pictorial
representation is always a translation. Nature suggests ideas
for interpretation, the artist supplies ideas of how the
interpretation is to be made.

While it is important that the artist thoroughly
develop his artistic powers, it also is important that he use a
tremendous amount of observation, concentration and
painting to acquire sufficient knowledge of typical shapes,
proportions and other characteristics of outdoor form,
line and color, for as Whipple says: “Nature does not
capriciously scatter her secrets as golden gifts to lazy
poets and luxurious darlings, but imposes tasks when she
presents opportunities.”

It takes years to paint the human figure well, even
though models have much the same proportions and other
characteristics. Form in outdoor nature has much more
variation and the artist far more leeway than in figure
painting. Nevertheless outdoor form demands as much study
as any other subject.

A well developed knowledge of nature is one of the
most important assets in building the picture. All other

17
THE APPROACH TO ART

faculties being equal, to know outdoor form is to be able to
translate it into a fine pictorial edifice.

A proper visible structure is needed to house the unseen
abstruse quality which is art. For through the eye —
“window of the soul” — must come those visual qualities
which please the sight and the mind.

ABSTRACT AND VISUAL QUALITY

We say a painting is beautiful, not altogether because of
its surface appearance but because of its deeper mysterious
qualities that lie beyond definition by man. For art is a capri-
cious and whimsical mistress. She purposely flaunts
her visible attractions and cunningly conceals her methods
of achieving these. Yet through this disguise she reveals a
deeper and more significant charm. She, at the same time,
endeavors to thwart any attempt to solve the secret of this
fascinating unseen beauty.

Someone has said: “Art is an art of disguising art.” This
means that the painter is confronted with the problem of
building a material object and must attempt to conceal the
influence of all rules and principles in the process.
Contradictory as this may seem it is a fact. The theory of art
is always replete with both seeming and actual contra-
dictions. Instinctive powers seek to hide the influence of
reason, and reason, in turn, seeks to guide instinct.

The abstract finer sensitivities of judgment, feeling,
ennobling thoughts and appreciations create the abstruse,
unseen quality that defines art. Yet reason tells us that all of
these are primarily caused through the viewing of actual
physical nature, and the translation made by employing
physical materials to build an actual physical structure, at the
same time a structure built with visual skill.

Beauty in nature becomes artistic quality only through
beauty in skilled craftsmanship. Skill in handling pigment is
in itself beautiful.

Although taboo to some over-sophisticated minds,

18
aseeae
ae a,

= = "s oie ay Te -—- - —— an

BY PERMISSION OF THE ART INSTITUTE OF CHICAGO

TOWERING TREES

By DANIEL GARBER

G There is nobility both in the conception and the execution of this painting. Detail is
plentiful, but it does not interfere with the bigness of the picture. Small items enhance,
rather than detract from the beauty of the work. The influence of the circle type of arrange-
ment can be seen here. This composition is a good example of the effectiveness of one main
opening between trees or other objects. Vertical lines are predominant yet enough lateral
lines exist to admirably balance from a linear standpoint. Perhaps this canvas may appear
to be overly influenced by nature. But if we study this and other work of Mr. Garber we
will realize that while he respects outdoor form, his artistry is never sacrificed to literalism.

19
THE APPROACH TO ART

beauty is always paramount quality both in the visual and
abstract sense. One is essential to the other. Under the
impulses brought about by its appreciation and enjoyment
one is led to create beauty in craftsmanship. Good crafts-
manship is always necessary. Skill, like beauty, is often
discarded these days. Yet a poorly painted picture could
hardly convey any of the finer sensations of abstract quality.
It is utterly impossible to feel quality in paintings unless it
is first seen in craftsmanship on the canvas.

In music the esthetic appreciations are all felt though
the sense of hearing the agreeableness of sound. In painting
the appreciation is through seeing the harmonious union
of line, form and color. In each case the finer sensual
pleasures first come through the physical action of hearing
actual quality in actual sounds and seeing actual beauty in
actual things.

KNOWLEDGE AND DISCIPLINE

The study of art is something that cannot be once
completed and then set aside. Knowledge is never complete.
Research and meditation are always the source of new
ideas. Aside from this, everyone, regardless of his degree of
proficiency, needs occasionally to review and take stock lest
he become stale, methodical, or rests in smug complacency.

While the artist needs to form convictions, he should, at
the same time, be open-minded. The saying that “one is never
too old to learn” is well applied to the painter. Not only are
new things always to be found, but the depictor must contin-
ually remind himself of those essentials he has already
learned and be ready to do more studying as each new motive
is painted. The true artist is always the student.

It is surprising how many beginners start painting
without any idea whatsoever of the mental approach, yet in
the early stages the mental approach is far more valuable
than attempting to paint right away. True, practice is equally
important, yet knowledge always precedes execution. No one

20
THE APPROACH TO ART

can paint better than he knows how. The proper develop-
ment of the mind is at least half of the equipment. The
observation needs to be continually tuned to keenness,
appreciation to its fullest degree, and the imaginative facul-
ties exercised constantly. The activities of the mind need to
be stimulated and practiced as well as the hand.

If we expect to do fine paintings we must think, study
and have a strong determination to overcome obstacles. As
soon as we put a mark upon the surface the composing
begins. At the same time its difficulties become apparent. It
is easy to recognize bad arrangement in other work, but
avoiding errors in our own is quite a different matter. No
blame for misjudgment can be placed in nature or any out-
side influences. When a pictorial unity is unsatisfactory, the
fault is entirely with the painter. He alone determines the
success or failure of each of his compositions.

The breadth or elasticity of principles gives the artist
ample room to exercise artistic freedom and assume author-
ity or the initiative to take hold of each problem and work it
out. The power to do this comes from ingenuity and determi-
nation, plus knowledge and training. Working out any prob-
lem depends on the ability to see errors, mistakes, obstacles
or room for improvement.

During the preparatory stage, as well as throughout the
career, problems and obstacles, both real and imagined, will
inevitably crop up. In overcoming or solving these, reason
and analysis are needed. Difficulties, either small or large, are
usually traceable to the violation of some major fundamen-
tal. When one properly considers the main factors, he gener-
ally finds in these the key to most solutions. Composing is a
matter of building up the unity step by step as items are
added to the arrangement. Whenever there is difficulty in the
harmony of the whole it can only come from misjudgment in
handling these items. This may be in placing objects, poor
consideration for line or wrong values, color, or even in poor
handling of pigment. Or the trouble might lie in the more
serious reasons of improper mental equipment or disrespect

21
THE APPROACH TO ART

for nature. Whatever it is, a retracing of principles and the
truths that underlie these is the solution.

Practically all painters occasionally have to set aside
their abstract procedure and consult the truth and facts or
principles presented by nature, science, tradition and prece-
dent. Their mental concept is then aided and their power of
intuition fortified so they can return to abstract procedure
more qualified to solve problems.

It is to be remembered that the artist is supposed to be
subconsciously guided only during the actual performance.
Between times he may put any amount of time he chooses on
research, analysis and conscious effort. Such procedure is not
unusual but is the regular custom. In fact, with the student,
it is a very good indication of seriousness and a determina-
tion to continue study, research and analysis.

The study of art is a lifetime matter. Any beginner may
as well make up his mind that he cannot learn all about
painting right away, and he might go further and realize that
he never will learn all about it. The best that anyone can do
is to accumulate all the knowledge possible of art and its
principles, study nature often and then practice continually.

Nature readily and constantly authenticates her appear-
ances. She does her part. Therefore the artist must be
prepared with the authority of sufficient knowledge and
training. He then may start his depiction with responsive,
respectful and enthusiastic interest. Enthusiasm is an impor-
tant asset. The plodder with even temperament does not go
far in painting.

According to Disraeli, “Every production of genius is
the production of enthusiasm.” Yet enthusiasm should never
lead beyond good taste or judgment. Knowledge or reason
always needs to check over-enthusiasm. Failure too will often
dampen too much ardor. With the student who has real
“stickability” a genuine failure is often better than a half-way
success.

Controlled enthusiasm in the right place is of great
worth in keying up all faculties. Enthusiasm guided by some

22
BY PERMISSION OF THE BILTMORE SALON, LOS ANGELES

MYSTERIOUS EMBERS (MOONLIGHT)

By FRANK TENNEY JOHNSON

@ = The pattern idea has aided in the conception of this picture, though the radiating line
may have some influence. The triangle too may be seen from points at the Indian's head
to each lower corner of the picture. Three “spots” of dark values also form another triangle.
Color plays an important part in the unity of Mr. Johnson's picture. The saturation of the
low-keyed shades of moonlight bring the color and values into excellent unifications.
Although the technique or brushwork does not show in the reproduction, skill with pigment
is one of Mr. Johnson's outstanding abilities.

23
THE APPROACH TO ART

measure of reason makes picturing pleasurable, then too,
decisions can be more easily and confidently made.
Indecision is a bad influence in selecting and in painting. It
indicates a lack of confidence and produces wavering
touches on the canvas. Both of these are disastrous to the
development of skill. All choices should be made with
alacrity and work done in a manner that shows the artist
knows what he is about.

Many times a brush stroke put on with confidence
may be a little false, yet it might have a quality that
overcomes any slight error. Confidence is an important
factor, yet has very little worth unless backed up with other
well-developed faculties.

DIRECT AND REMOTE INFLUENCES

The profession of the artist is a profound one. It
demands a wide knowledge not only of its own essential fac-
tors, but a familiarity with philosophy and other doctrines
pertaining to the needs and desires of mankind. The theory
of art is irrevocably linked with nearly all other lines of cre-
ative and factual thinking.

Burke says, “Art can never give the rules that made

”

art.

It has been said that the better way to study art is
indirectly through the study of science, history and philo-
sophy. These all have a distinct influence on it. But outside
of this, even apparently irrelevant items may aid in
some way.

It is a well known fact that many problems are solved
when the mind is far away from them. Solutions may come at
the most inopportune time, while we are about to drop off to
sleep, while holding conversation, listening to music, or dur-
ing any of the innumerable activities apart from the subject
in question.

Many students and artists, however, do not have enough
interest outside of painting, and often apply themselves too

24
THE APPROACH TO ART

closely to their work. This is a mistake. We do not live to
paint but rather to use it as a contributing factor to the art of
living. While it is necessary to subordinate many things and
do a tremendous amount of study and work in painting, we
should develop interest and appreciation in different things.
Some artists, poets and other creative workers often delve
into subjects far removed from their own media. This not
only gives them a broad knowledge but a relaxation from a
probable over-concentration.

Aside from this, all workers in the fine arts need to now
and then come down from the Olympian fields of fantasy. All
feet are of clay. Even though flights of fancy and imaginative
wanderings are essential in creative work, everyone must
occasionally meet the realities of life. Artistic productions
would probably be lacking in quality were not their footing
on the verities of nature and factual human requirements.

Although art is mainly concerned with appearances,
impulses and imaginative concepts, a respect for truth and
fact is always needed. Appearances are always dependent
upon material substance, and art is always dependent upon
thought and doctrines of other fields.

We do not go to art to learn its rules and principles,
nor for the truths that underlie these, but to the sciences
and philosophies of other subjects. Philosophy and science
are closely related to art. They attempt, in so far as they
can, to define art and all of its factors and principles.
Yet both science and philosophy can only go to a certain
point lest they encroach too far upon the domain of
intuitive procedure.

While science and philosophy furnish fact and truth as
a general basis, this basis is intended as an authority for
guidance in training the faculties to an instinctive perfor-
mance. Science and philosophy also builds up a storehouse
of knowledge or reserve for study and meditation, to be used
in the intervals between painting periods.

It is doubtful if any scientific rule may be applied
directly in the constructing of a picture without hurting its

25
THE APPROACH TO ART

artistic value. Attempts are continually made to set up a
mathematical ratio of proportions for composition, or other
factors in painting, yet it may be safely said that wherever
this is used as an inflexible and continued rule, the artistic
value is lessened.

In modern time, streamlining, other mechanical terms,
adverse influences and the tremendous number of isms
prevalent, cause true art to suffer. There is persistent effort to
set aside most principles, inject all sorts of irrelevant ideas
and adopt short cuts to lift the incompetent to fame.
However, if the student expects his work to fulfill the
intended purpose of art, he will have to do as someone has
said, “mix brains with paint.” This means that reason or
intelligence be used along with study and practice.

26
CHAPTER II
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

SELECTION

Good composition is always determined by good
selection. Fine painting is a matter of proper taste and judg-
ment in choosing the motive, accepting some parts, discard-
ing others, and making changes or alterations throughout
the procedure.

Selection, like all factors in art, is difficult to define or
separate from the composite process in painting. Judgment
varies according to the subject, type of composition, and the
viewpoint of the painter. Selection is never the same in two
instances; a choice in one case would not do in another.
Therefore, in order to develop good taste and judgment in
selecting, it is necessary to develop the feeling for artistic
unity. If we can fully appreciate harmony in pictorial design,
we more easily select the parts and judge the measure of
influences that create it.

In painting outdoors the first consideration should be
does the view present a worthy motive? Is there quality that
exhilarates and lifts the mind beyond the mere making of a
picture?

A worthwhile idea, entirely separate from the mechanics
of painting, should precede each picture arrangement. If the
artist merely formed a plan for picturing a place or thing, art
would indeed suffer. Art has a deeper and more significant
meaning. It must touch the innermost depths of feeling from
which comes all esthetic enjoyment or appreciation.

27
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

William M. Chase admonished his students to develop
appreciation, have high ideals, select inspiring motives, paint
in a grand style, and never be satisfied with reaching for a
mere star but for the greatest one.

While it is necessary that the painter look for visual
qualities in nature, he needs also to sense attributes which are
beyond vision. The power is given to him to feel the mystery
and charm of fleeting clouds; the immensity and depth of
blue skies and atmospheric distances; the grace and rhythm
of living and expanding trees and other growths; the nobil-
ity, grandeur and strength of mighty peaks; the endless
movement and vitality of the sea and its forms. All these and
many more offer unlimited material for worthy ideas. The
motive selected should not include anything that disturbs the
complete ideology of beauty or pure esthetic pleasure.

In painting pictures, one needs to think of the esthetic
intent. Art has been used and abused all through the ages. It
has been employed to illustrate all manner of things far
removed from its actual purpose. Artistic quality is the goal,
it is never the story in the picture. The painter may choose
any subject he desires and make a fine work of it, technically
speaking. But will any subject fulfill all requirements of art?
While life or existence is a continual strife between ignoble
and noble motives, art is definitely on the side of spiritual
constructiveness.

One can hardly imagine a murder scene or the infliction
of bodily torture giving complete esthetic satisfaction. Of
course the outdoor painter is not concerned with such sub-
jects, but he is concerned with good taste in his selection and,
while nature has beauty in untold quantity, there are often
subjects or items that are undoubtedly unsuited or contain
discords that need to be rejected. Sentimental aspects, too,
must be shied away from. Such things as the moon, a freak-
ish rock, a waterfall, are items that may have more of a sen-
timental attraction than an artistic appeal.

Over-stressing dramatic effects is also liable to over-
shadow artistic quality. Often the influence of such effects

28
COURTESY OF THE CHICAGO GALLERIES ASSOCIATION, CHICAGO

A GLIMPSE OF THE SEA

By PAULINE PALMER

« This arrangement may be called the circular, the tunnel: or even the radiating
line. The influence of all these can be easily discerned. There is a well-studied variety
in the masses, and a fine outdoor feeling in the whole design. Luminosity in the
shadows and sparkling accents also add to the quality and picturesqueness. Good textural
rendering is evident in the various forms — the foliage is fluffy, there is hardness in the
timbered structures, movement and vibration in the shadows. All these are well integrated

in simple design — yet a design with considerable variety.

29
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

if handled well, may add to picturesqueness and command
immediate attention. Yet this alone will not create a fine
picture. Some of the more subtle qualities coming from anal-
ogous values or color and refinement in pigment handling is
needed to balance the strong vitality in dramatic contrasts.

In the millions of suitable subjects can be found an
ample field for study and practice without being tempted to
paint motives which might include a questionable note. Just
as much art can be injected in a pleasing subject as one that
is unpleasant or unworthy. There is much real beauty in trees,
streams, hill, mountains, rocks, boats, clouds, the sea,
buildings and hundreds of other subjects. Here is material
everlasting — material with inexhaustible artistic possibili-
ties. It only remains for the artist to qualify himself so that
he may choose wisely. Careful selection is needed not only in
type of subject but in the preliminary work and each stage of
painting as well.

When approaching nature for depiction the primary
consideration is the station point which will give the best
translation of the motive. To get a proper view and idea of
any subject, one should study it from several angles. The idea
is to locate the easel at a point which will reveal desirable
variations, not only of the size of masses but quality in line,
values and color.

The location of the easel should be in a position where
the shadowed parts and lighted areas will suggest the proper
measures, that is, the unequal distribution of light and dark.
(Plate VIII). It must be remembered, too, that shadows
change rapidly and if the work is not completed in time,
changing shadows may alter the entire arrangement.

When the sun is on the extreme right or left of the
painter, especially if it is low, light and dark areas are more
likely to be equally divided and, therefore, more difficult to
arrange. Although the latter situation may, in some
instances, give a proper inequality of values, in the average
landscape looking more nearly toward the sun or partly away
from it generally presents better arrangement of masses.

30
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

However, all of this is merely suggestion, as in the millions of
views to be seen almost any number can be found that are
not dependent on the direction of the sun, or on any
sunlight, for that matter. The point to be emphasized is, if
big simple masses are naturally presented, the composing is
simplified and made easier.

Beginners often make the mistake of selecting views that
would tax the ability of the more experienced artists. At one
time or another every noted painter learns the value of
simplicity in selecting. The sooner the student learns this
important fact the better off he is.

The experienced painter may be able to handle very
complicated views. However, if there be commandments to
the beginners, the first one should be that he select the
simple arrangements.

It takes very little of the view to make an extremely
large picture. Large simple masses are convincing; they
have distinct attraction and immediately call attention to
the picture.

Much study, practice and fine pictorial compositions
can be gained from a few masses, values, lines and color.
For instance, in marine painting, it is surprising how a large
rock, a cliff, and perhaps a small glimpse of sea can make
an imposing canvas. A large wave, few smaller ones, with
possibly a rock or two, and a bit of land is also enough to
create a fine picture. (Waugh and Smith on Plate V., Payne
and Dougherty on Plate IJ).

In landscape, two or three large trees are all one needs to
construct a powerful composition. A large mountain, a fore-
ground with a few objects such as trees or rocks, a bit of sky,
is material for the largest picture. Naturally, these are only a
few examples; thousands of other suggestions are to be seen
everywhere.

The compositions by C. L. A. Smith, William Wendt
and Maxfield Parrish on Plate III show the effectiveness of
large simple masses which produce a direct and immediate
appeal. So, too, do the striking arrangements of masses in

31
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

the designs by George Elmer Browne, Albert Ryder, and
Harry Vincent on Plate V.

It may be noted that all of the pictorial ideas by differ-
ent painters on Plates II, III, IV, V, and VI, show simplicity
in motives. Practically none of the pictures take in a broad
expanse of view. The two compositions of Turner on Plate II
encompass a fairly wide range, but even here the wide range
is only in the distance.

It may be noticed that each design, by the artists on the
above mentioned plates, has the most casual arrangement.
None of them appear forced or studio composed.

In all of the reproductions of paintings it may also
be observed that a broad simple organization of the masses
and spaces is evident. Even where there is much detail or
variation these do not disturb the bigness of the main
designs. All painters of note realize the importance of
simplicity in composition; the subordination of detail,
consideration for artistic principles and requirements as
well as a respect for outdoor form.

Nature offers all kinds of motives. Some are easily
adapted, others have to be simplified or altered. But this
is the business of the artist. Nature is not concerned with
invention though she does, at times, offer material for exer-
cising this faculty. In other instances she may present one
of those rare unusual arrangements that is really a gem,
standing out as a defiant challenge to the powers of
imagination or invention. This is the place where nature and
art coincide to a certain degree in the main design, yet, even
here, the artist must assert himself and utilize his individual
taste and judgment in treating the smaller items. A natural
composition needs just as much thought and effort as one
which requires alteration. Everyone must put something of
himself into his work. While nature furnishes the visual
motive, art comes from the depictor.

There is never a lack of material for selection. Nature is
always true and generous in presenting arrangements of
every description. It is up to the student to train himself to

32
CONCARNEAU HARBOR

By EDGAR A. PAYNE

q A grouped mass is the principal idea used in the composition, although the triangle
or steelyard may have had some influence. The three spot principle is also evident. The eye
is attracted first to the boats, then to the dark note on the horizon at the right. Trailing
along from there the glance is intercepted momentarily by the boats. It finally rests a short
time on the boats at the left. There is sufficient variety in the sky and water to give
artistic repetition. A grouped mass on a field of medium values usually demands variation

in both the main and secondary areas.

33
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

recognize and accept a natural composition or choose one
that lends itself to alteration or simplification.

Part or all of any view may be accepted as is, or its areas
may be altered, parts discarded, or items introduced. Care,
however, should be used in selection or alteration. A scene
might require too much changing but the question may be
asked, how much is too much? The answer to this is that the
main masses or larger interest should require little or no
alteration, with only the less important items being altered,
rejected, or introduced.

The figure painter uses one or more figures as his main
forms and varies these only in the incidentals. The back-
grounds and other accessories may be almost anything and
arranged in any manner that will support the dominant
figure masses.

This principle is a safe one to preserve in painting
landscapes, marine, still life or any other subject. It is always
more satisfactory to introduce small items than it is to
discard or introduce extremely large objects.

Unusual personal quirks and mannerisms in brush work
alteration and adjustments are the things that produce the
finesse or charm of individuality. The main stem of the big
masses determines the general character of the design, but it
is the treatment of the smaller parts that clothes the picture
with the personality of the artist. It takes real ingenuity to
select, reject and arrange all parts so that the picture appears
both artistic and casual.

Learning to select and compose is largely a matter of
self-discipline. Therefore, if the student is apt to be over-
influenced by realism and is given entirely to seeking natural
composition, he should force himself to practice rearrange-
ment; while if he is inclined toward the other extreme of
disregarding nature, he should make it a practice to seek
natural compositions and study them closely.

Sometimes a scene may present material for several
pictures. (Plate VII.) For example the sky will reveal very
interesting cloud formations; hills present attractive

34
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

ariations in shadows or wooded slopes; and the foregrounds
caceful masses of tree forms. All of these might have more
r less equal appeal.

Here is real confusion. The student must make his
1oice as to what selection he will feature. If the clouded sky
chosen, the horizon should be low. The foreground or any
ther part of the picture may be dark or shadowed. If the
ills are selected, they should occupy a prominent part of the
unvas area, and the other parts should be treated in a man-
er that will not attract too much attention. If trees, fore-
round, or other parts are to be featured, all other areas
10uld yield dominance.

Often there is an instance where the view is crowded,
2t the painter desires to use most of what is seen. For
<ample the scene might reveal tall trees in the foreground
ith a high wooded hill in the background. (Plate XII.)
o paint this as it appears might be confusing. The artist
‘ust choose which part he will feature, the hill or the trees.
ature might offer some help by casting a slight haze over
1e distance, or a shadow over the foreground. Nevertheless
1e problem still is the painter’s. He may lighten the distance
r darken the foreground masses; or, if the color of the
liage on the trees permits he may lighten these and darken
1e distance by cloud shadows. At any rate simplification of
ich a view will be needed. It is most difficult to combine tall
ees and high hills in the background, particularly if the
alues are closely related.

THE VIEW FINDER

Where there are several motives to be seen in one view,
1e view finder will aid in selecting the most promising com-
osition. This device also guides in the process of judging
alues and holding the main masses or parts together in both
ie view and picture. The view finder is made of a piece of
urdboard 6x8 or 8x10 inches, or larger or smaller, if desired.

rectangular opening is cut out in the center about the
lape or proportion of the sketch. The mat around this

35
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

opening should be two or more inches in width and painted
a medium warm gray. By holding this device at arm’s length
or nearer the eye, the motive my be separated from the rest of
the view. Color may also be studied to advantage by looking
through the view finder.

Several other artifices and practices may be used to
judge and maintain or hold together the main impression.
Whether indoors or outdoors most painters stand while
working. Now and then they walk backwards at the same
time squinting their eyes so that the view and picture will
resolve themselves into their largest masses. Reducing glasses
or mirrors are often an aid in selection and judging the com-
position. A large mirror placed opposite the easel in the stu-
dio is also a help in judging the relation of the parts to the
main unity. The picture is of course reversed, yet balance is
balance, whether it is seen normally or reversed.

The student may look at his work in reduced form,
reversed, sidewise, upside down, or in any other manner he
chooses as long as he correctly judges unification.

BALANCE

Balance is composing is not limited to the placing of
two or more large value areas on the canvas but calls for the
balancing of color, line, breadth and detail, and the influence
of the abstract factors or principles. (Abstract factors and
influences are discussed at length in Chapter I.)

In starting the actual arrangements on the canvas, the
placing of the horizon or other main lines and the largest
dark and light masses or spaces is the first consideration.
Then the secondary, tertiary and other masses may be placed
in whatever location gives the best balance. For instance, in
the steelyard type of arrangement, the largest mass may be
on either side of the canvas, the second largest mass on the
opposite side, while the third mass can be on or near the the-
oretical fulcrum, in the distance or the near foreground; the
smaller masses may then be placed at the painter’s discretion.

36
COURTESY OF THE ARTIST

CARVERSVILLE BROOK

By EDWARD REDFIELD

Q = This canvas embodies graceful rhythmic flow of line and fine variety in mass and
textural qualities. The circle form of composition can be seen, yet there is the feeling
of the S in the curves of the stream as the glance turns behind the house at the loft.
The slanting lines of the dark tree trunk are properly opposed by the branches. Three spots
of dark values may be seen in the tree trunk, the house, at the right, and the stream.
Mr. Redfield’s work always shows qualities arising from directness and sureness of
brushwork. Another quality is that each area has variety and interest which does not
interfere with the main design.

37
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

This, however, merely suggests one example; as a matter of
fact, all masses may be placed practically anywhere as long as
they form a pictorial balance or unification of the parts. The
main mass or its edges, however, should not be in the center
but in a place where the eye can definitely travel to distance
on one side or another. The main large mass may be in the
foreground, the secondary mass in the distance, or this order
may be reversed. (Plate XI).

Some painters suggest that before the start is made in
composing on the canvas two straight lines be lightly drawn
vertically and horizontally through the canvas center. (Plate
XII). These are, of course, temporary lines and are intended
to act as a guard to prevent equal spacing of the masses in
the composition. The area where the lines cross in the center
suggests a place or a “dead spot” around which all parts
revolve, through each part is located at various distances
from the exact canvas center. In most pictures this means not
only the center of the vertical and horizontal dimensions
but the figurative center between foreground and extreme
distance as well. Here is a slightly different problem than
vertical and horizontal equalization. Balance in distance is a
matter of creating an artistic inequality between the main
darks and light values, areas or spaces, rather than between
two or three near-related dark or medium values. The
balance for distance is also aided by color. When the fore-
ground colors are modified and repeated in the lighter
shades and grays of distance, their repetition always helps to
balance the composition.

The inclination is to think of only the canvas surface
and the first and second dimensions. However, while the
balance of the main masses in the near part of the picture
calls immediate attention to the work, a consideration for
balance in perspective adds charm and picturesqueness to
the whole composition

Full pictorial unity depends on an equilibrium in three
dimensions.

38
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

The more effort put into study and experimentation, the
less will be needed in painting the ultimate picture. However,
such study should not be along one groove. In order to
develop respect for nature, it is good practice to make some
rather truthful sketches. Then, to develop the inventive facul-
ties, others should be done from imagination. Another good
practice is to take the outdoor pencil sketches and vary them
in many different ways.

In preliminary pencil notes for the ultimate composition
on the canvas, the artist forms some idea of how much of the
influence of realism and invention he will use in his main
plan. With this once approximated, the subsequent work on
the canvas may be done with less conscious effort. While any
amount of effort may be put into the preliminary notes, the
actual work on the picture should go along without a hitch.
The less effort, the more pleasure and finer quality.

After all painting is a matter of relaxing to the pleasur-
able influences of imagination and emotional impulses.
During the making of preliminary sketches discipline is part
of the routine. Nature should be approached with this idea in
mind. Each sketching adventure, during the training period,
should be a disciplinary drill to key up the imagination,
appreciation and enthusiasm.

To get the most out of study, the student should look
upon each view or motive as a lesson to acquire knowledge
and develop all abilities. Starting out with the sole idea of
getting a picture presupposes effort to that end. This hints
that the student expects praise from friends — pure vain-
glory at the expense of artistic improvement.

Many artists repeatedly paint the same subject many
times, merely for the sake of practice. The French impres-
sionist, Monet, painted the same haystack twenty times from
one angle, then painted it twenty more times from another
angle. There is real perseverance, the stuff of which great
painters are made.

Depicting a single subject a number of times is a pretty
sure method of learning all about that subject as well as

42
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

being the best manner of resolving it into a fine pictorial
unity. Besides, the practice develops all facilities and creates
confidence and sureness. Real advancement generally comes
from studying and experimenting with one problem until
it is mastered.

Each worthy subject will bear much observation and
any number of pencil or even oil sketches either from the
same or several angles. As these are made, each becomes
better; some, perhaps the later ones, will be done “without
conscious effort.”

Instead of making several sketches, one may make
one with either pencil or paint, work out all problems by
deliberately using conscious effort, then set this aside and do
another of the same thing rapidly and with enthusiasm. The
spontaneity and freshness of the result will probably surprise
the painter. Little or no struggle will be evident in the final
sketch, for it is likely that there will be real vitality and
worthwhile quality.

The first sketch has familiarized the painter with the
main characteristics of the view. Study and practice have
given him confidence and sureness to do the last one in an
easy and natural manner. All have given him some valuable
knowledge of nature and aided all other facilities.

All artistic faculties should be kept alert by being
continually exercised. One means of doing this is to study
and paint, or compose many different kinds of subjects.
While almost every painter eventually confines himself to
one or two motives, it is well, at least part of the time, for
beginners to picture different subjects; then a natural liking
for certain types will develop of its own accord.

The outdoor sketches shown on Plate I show a variety
of motives. These sketches were selected at random from a
collection of about twelve hundred. In most of these, the
attention is given more to the literal aspect than to
rearrangement. Some artists use this method of making
sketches of the general truthfulness in nature, then employ

43
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

them as authentic data to guide the arranging of the ultimate
picture in the studio.

As each painter develops his abilities, he adopts
methods and chooses subjects suited to his liking and
temperament. Some artists paint large pictures outdoors,
some make sketches and reproduce them quite accurately,
others improvise considerably, and still others may make a
number of sketches of one subject, then consolidate them all
into the final picture.

The method or means of composing is unimportant so
long as artistic judgment is well developed and nature the
fundamental principles of selection, composition and of art
are respected.

COMPOSITION

Ruskin says, in as many words, that the great aim of
composition is to create unity and that one feature should be
the main interest and dominate all other interests or masses.
Practically all other writers on art agree that this is the main
principle in creating unified designs.

Pleasing design or a balanced pictorial plan is chief
among the requisites of all fine paintings. A picture needs
a solid foundation. We would not build a house without a
well thought out preliminary plan or a substantial footing in
the soil.

If a composition is to fill its first requirement, that of
attracting and holding the interest, it must embody those
elements which accomplish this end. If through carelessness
or lack of knowledge or practice, important factors have
been ignored, the feeling of unity or balance is destroyed, the
work is inevitably doomed to mediocrity.

Weak consideration of the main essentials is to court
disaster. Students, yes, even experienced artists, often become
interested in one or two factors and neglect others equally
important, thus injuring complete unity. Notable examples
of this may be seen in the work of certain painters of the
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

French Impressionist School. In their enthusiasm for color
and vibration they often neglected values, drawings and
unity in composition. Edges, too, were sometimes over-
softened in their eagerness to secure vibration. Thus not only
was truth and other essential factors set aside, but the main
unity was disorganized.

Nevertheless, the Impressionists’ idea of color vibration
and luminosity, being built on natural laws, was a sound
theory, and subsequently influenced nearly all schools of
painting. Not only was more attention paid to the truthful
aspects of nature, but the abstract principle came into its
own importance in the field of art. This is one more instance
of proof that natural laws are the basis of all principles, and
that new principles can never set aside existing or accepted
fundamentals.

Although impressionism is usually associated with the
spotty system of painting, it actually embraces many con-
temporary methods of depicting broadly. While the vibrating
of color with small dabs or bits of complementary color
produces fine quality, there is also great charm in broadly
conceived and painted canvases. Breadth in painting creates
an abstract interval that exercises the imaginative faculties of
both the painter and his appreciator.

The idea of breadth means simplicity. Simplicity means
one unified idea.

First bringing together the main masses in preliminary
plan, and maintaining this completeness throughout the
work is the sound principle.

Anyone gets into difficulties often enough without
attempting to compose with a poorly considered first plan.
Often the painter who has not gone into preliminary study of
his subject may find after the work is well under way that his
horizon is too much centered, a vertical edge or line divides
the canvas in half. Perhaps he has two points of interest,
several equal masses, or spaces — one or more of the many
errors that causes discord or spoils unity.

45
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

Usually, any attempts to reconstruct, to a large degree,
any composition after the process is far along will probably
be unsatisfactory if not entirely disastrous. True, many
experienced artists can do considerable reconstruction, even
paint an entirely new picture upon a freshly painted
disorganized one. Perhaps, in some cases it might be good
practice for anyone to occasionally do this. It will at least
develop ingenuity and show a determination not to admit
defeat.

Whatever advantages this may have, however, they are
not enough for the practice to become habitual.

Setting the stage for painting by thoroughly planning
the structure in preliminary notes is the best safeguard
against at least some difficulties.

Beginning with the main essentials arranged in fair
unity, one can overlook many small falsities or irrelevant
details that may appear in accidentals.

The idea in any composing is to get the work to a sense
of completion as soon as possible and then proceed with a
feeling that the work may be left off at any time. As a matter
of fact, many good pictures are ruined by constant striving
to make them better. Over-modeling and accenting detail or
highlights is an over-influence of realism.

There is always a place to stop painting. This is the
point where the maximum quality has been achieved. This
statement is easily enough made, but judging when this point
is reached is quite a different matter. Many artists have the
good sense to quite at the right time; others need to be told.
This gives rise to the old saying that it take two to make a
picture; one to do the work, the other to stop him before he
spoils it.

Some students mistakenly feel that the more work put
on a canvas the better it is. In some instances when the
painter works in a more or less methodical manner and
to a definite plan he may make a fine painting and improve
it by continued effort. However, the practice of painting in
a broad impressionistic manner is best brought out with

46
BY PERMISSION OF THE ARTIST

FOG VEILED HEADLANDS

By JACK WILKINSON SMITH

© = Here is an unusual composition, the lateral lines are well intercepted, diffused
and opposed in such a way that no conscious effort is evident. There is a fine feeling of
a circular observation created by sheer artistry in an arrangement where the lines are
predominantly horizontal — very few lines definitely describe the circle. Subtleness of
values, charming small contrasts or accents and lost and found edges are considered
more important here than large strong contrasts. Although Mr. Smith is capable of
handling large masses of extreme values, dexterity in handling close values and sparkling

small bits define him as a strict individualist.

47
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

considerable preliminary planning, then painting the
picture rapidly.

A well-worked-out canvas in some hands has admirable
qualities, but the spontaneous vitality in work done more
freely and quickly also has a real worth-while quality.

Each artist develops a manner of selecting, composing
or painting that suits his temperament, yet nearly all take
advantage of artistic license. They gererally express the main
idea in a broad comprehensive way without sacrificing
artistic quality to nature. Nor does nature need to be
sacrificed to artistic purposes. There is no reason why the
characteristics of a particular object should be lost by slight
alterations of its contour, proportion or some modification
of its value, color or the changing of its location.

Naturally, unlimited alterations are not for the beginner
in his very first attempts in composing. Corot, Turner, East,
Wyant or Ranger might take great liberties and obtain fine
unity, while the same liberties in inexperienced hands would
produce the opposite results.

If one has the knowledge, ability and experience, he can
change or remove a tree, invent a path or road, or alter any
of the innumerable items without the change or addition
being obvious, or artistic quality lessened.

However, with all the possibilities of artistic leeway in
alteration or rearranging, the principle of unequal measures
is irrevocable. In any form of composition, the equal shapes
or sizes of masses is to be avoided as far as possible. Some
forms are difficult to change, for instance, architectural
measures are often equal. The thing to do here is to
disguiser the similarity in form by variety in value or color or
softened edges.

Long lines that parallel the sides of the canvas may
confuse with the frame, lead the eyes off the canvas area or
away from the main interest. (Plate IX). Parallel curves, too,
are often a discord. As example, the view may show a tree,
or group of them, with their tops rounded, above this,
the rounded contour of a hill; still farther away a cloud

48
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

with similar curvature. This condition calls for adjustment.
(Plate X).

The ragged or irregular contours of trees or other
growths is sometimes disturbing and may need simplifica-
tion. Another confusion might be trees where the masses of
foliage are about equal to the openings within boundaries of
the main form. Here the foliage should be more heavily
massed, or the openings should be enlarged, so that either
the masses or openings should definitely occupy the largest
part of the tree area.

In rare instances nature nay present trees nearly the
same distance apart or they may be set out at equal spacing.
Consequently several openings between the trunks might be
the same size. Here is a place where alteration is imperative.
One main opening must be created to draw the glance to
one exit and to keep it from being disturbed by trying to
go through two or three. (All items in the two preceding
paragraphs may be seen on Plate X).

In some cases where trees are rather close together on a
line, the composition will be more pleasing if the footing of
some of the trees is placed a little forward. (Plate IX).

HILLS AND MOUNTAINS

Extremely high ground elevations, such as hills and
mountains, often present other attractions than their physi-
cal shapes. The feeling of great height, bigness, nobility or
grandeur are additional qualities that may well be preserved.
Therefore, if hills or mountains are the main attraction, their
top contour should be placed near the upper edge of the
canvas, the horizon placed low, trees and other items in the
foreparts kept small and subordinated. Often, in pictures of
this kind, the middle distance will be covered with growths
which obscure the horizon. This has a tendency to destroy
the feeling of stability, or the height of the elevation. To
overcome this, some slight indication of a straight line on the
eye level or natural horizon may be used. (Plate XII).

49
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

If we decide to make a specialty of painting hill or
mountain subjects, we should study their characteristic
forms as the figure painter studies the human figure. Hills,
mountains, or any other subject for that matter, cannot be
successfully painted unless some knowledge of characteristic
formation is accumulated. Height is one of the strongest
points in hills or mountains. They are also massive and sug-
gest solidity and permanence. These characteristics should
be brought out when composing such subjects.

One other important thing to remember when compos-
ing hills and mountains is that form extends from their top
crests towards the painter as well as to the right and left of
their peaks. Picturing this foreshortening is not an easy mat-
ter. The ridges and canyons are generally irregular and their
form deceptive. Their general appearance is often like an
upright flat plane. The artist must use considerable ingenuity
to foreshorten form, arrange values and color to create reces-
sion in hill and mountain pictures.

When sketching outdoors, the location of the easel
should always be in a place where the mountain is mostly in
shadow or mostly in light. (Plate VIII). Equal measures are
particularly disastrous in this kind of subject. At times, too,
one may be compelled to alter shadows or other forms to
prevent equal spacing or monotonous repetition.

In composing hills and mountains, unity may depend on
an all over atmospheric condition, or the contrast of haze in
the distance, and strong foreground values; or still further, on
patterns of cloud shadows or those cast along canyons or
ridges. The treatment of all these factors will, of course,
depend on local condition, appearances and the painter’s
individual way of utilizing what he sees.

Preceding and transcending all visual appearances, how-
ever, are the great invisible qualities to be felt when viewing
hills and mountains — their nobility, height and grandeur —
those fine abstract qualities that exhilarate and lift the mind
even from visual appearances. When these abstract qualities

50
BY PERMISSION OF STENDAHL GALLERIES, LOS ANGELES

HOME OF THE QUAIL

By WILLIAM WENDT

© = The work of William Wendt reveals a decidedly different mannerism — a purely
individual technique that leans toward no particular school. The accomplishment of such
distinctiveness should be the ultimate aim of each student of painting. The above black and
white reproduction shows little of this technique in the smaller items but it does show a
simplicity in design — a feeling for bigness and unity. The influence of the steelyard,
pattern and circle may be observed in the basic plan. Here also can be observed a fine

example of heavily massed foliage being relieved by sparse leaves, twigs and limbs.

31
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

are successfully conveyed by visual quality in the picture, any
amount of study and work will be justified.

TREES

Trees are possibly used more in outdoor painting than
any other objects. Other motives may be seen and have their
claim, but trees will probably always hold first place.

Outside of their usefulness, trees are universally loved
for their beauty, grace and variety, both in nature and in pic-
tures. The variety in species, and again, variation in the same
species, together with the artist’s leeway, gives an unlimited
field for originality in picturing these growths. The feeling
that trees are living, growing and expanding things gives
beauty and rhythm to pictures. Texture, too, adds quality.
The semi-rigidness of trees is a good example of opposition
in material substance. The trunks and large limbs are
rigid and solid, while the leaves and twigs are fluffy and
have movement.

To paint trees well, we should know them well. Each
and every tree has its characteristics. These should be
studied. Some trees have very thickly massed foliage which
suggests compactness and solidity. Others have sparse foliage
with perhaps many openings between the leaves and twigs.
Certain species are tall and slender, some more “squatty”
or round in form. Aside from their shapes, texture and
local color, seasonal changes and atmosphere modify their
appearance.

The combination of heavily-massed tress relieved by
sparse foliage in places will give more variety than if the
latter is not included. (Wendt, Plate III). This applies as well
to the other way around. Oftentimes heavily massed foliage
will be seen in a group of trees. In order to create variety,
some part of these may be changed into more sparse or
scattered foliage, or in any event, the introduction of other
growths is always the right of the painter. While one is
generally guided to a degree, by the realistic aspect of trees,

52
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

it is well to keep in mind also that realism must always yield
to artistic unity and that artistic license is always at hand.

The placement of trees and other objects in the compo-
sition has great leeway, with only two restrictions: One is, the
rearrangement must appear casual; the other is that the
essential character of each selected large item be maintained.
Objects may be enlarged, reduced or their appearance
changed without creating disrespect for nature’s truths.

The average layman has a decided prejudice against
trees, the sails of boats, or other objects running off the top
of the canvas. This should have no bearing whatever on the
artist’s plan. Yet, in many cases with beginners, it does. Some
of them place trees or other forms just within the confines of
the picture area, often stunting their height in so doing.

The composition in all instances is only part of the view.
Therefore, objects or masses may run off the canvas on any
of its edges without hurting the artistic effect, all other
factors being harmonious.

Naturally, this presupposes the main mass or interest
should be well within the picture area, though if one tree or
a group is the chief attraction the bulk need not be entirely
on the canvas. On the other extreme, it is not well to deliber-
ately cause mass or objects to run off or “hug” the edges of
the picture. The principle to be respected is that all arrange-
ments must appear casual.

The whole idea is that the painter is not building some-
thing within a given picture area but translating a section of
the range of vision.

Pictorial composition should always suggest a natural
possibility.

CLOUDS AND MARINES

Of all outdoor motives, clouds and marines are the most
difficult to draw and paint. Since clouds and water forms are
constantly changing, there is not sufficient time for picturing.
In the average outdoor views, masses vary only in size or

53
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

appearance, while clouds and the sea not only change their
shape but their position as well. Changes occur even between
the glance and the mark on the surface. Therefore, the
main characteristics of these two motives have to be firmly
established in the mind, because depicting them is
practically a memory proposition, so that “must” is the work
to use when suggesting that the student learn typical forms of
clouds or sea.

Outside of the stationary land parts in cloud and sea
pictures, the painter has to depend largely on his invention
and imagination in arranging the moving parts.

Both cloud and sea subjects have, in most instances, the
extremes of texture in the rigid, solid or permanent nature of
ground forms as opposed by the parts that are liquid or
vaporish and moving. Contrasts are not generally in evidence
within the actual clouded sky area; shadowed parts on the
ground usually furnish opposition. In marines, the dark
extreme is generally the wet rocks.

Cloud views may range all the way from a dark stormy
appearance to extremely brilliant sunlit forms. Unless it is a
snow covered view, sunlit clouds in large masses present the
most luminous of outdoor aspects. Both values and colors
are limited in cloud views, although the latter is often evident
in sunsets. Contrasts of values within the sky areas are some-
what restricted, yet at times storm clouds may show rather
strong accents. Looking toward the sun also may reveal
rather abrupt contrasts, yet when extreme darks exist in
clouds it must be remembered that their substance is light,
vaporish and atmospheric and their general tone lighter than
ground parts, although there are instances when ground
areas are lighter than dark clouds.

A low horizon is usually the first thing to consider, if the
clouded sky is to be featured. The next thing to think about
is the division of the sky area. A decision is to be made of
just how much of the blue sky is to show (if it exists in the
view), and just what proportion of the clouds are to be uti-
lized. Here is where the law of unequal measures should be

54
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

invoked. The sky area must not be divided equally by blue
sky and clouds.

Since the subject here is clouds, they would naturally be
selected to dominate the picture. Their form should occupy
at least two-thirds, or even more, of the sky area of the can-
vas. Into this situation, though, enters another principle —
that of an isolated mass in the field of another value. The
main area may be mostly blue sky with small cloud forms
prominent enough to be the main attraction.

At any rate, the point to be brought out here is that
when clouds and blue sky appear in nearly equal proportion,
artistic license should be invoked and one or the other be
given the most space in the sky area. Although there is
really no limitation to the proportions, the sky area may have
only a small bit of blue sky or, on the other hand, only one
or two small clouds may exist on the large field of blue sky,
or the whole space may be either blue sky or clouds.

If clouds appear, usually they are the main or secondary
point of interest in sky area, though in pictures with large
overhead or sky spaces it is possible to have figures, trees or
other items as the chief attraction. These may sometimes be
effective if their parts are extended upward into extremely
light skies. (Borg, Plate V).

Cloud shadows, when cast upon the ground, are one of
the artist’s greatest aids in selection or composing. They can
be placed anywhere to suit the need of any unity. This is espe-
cially true if the cloud forms are moving rapidly, as the
chances are that all sections of the scene will be shadowed at
some time during the sketching period. With careful plan-
ning, beautiful patterns or design can be made by placing
cloud shadows in various locations on the landscape.

Clouds and their shadows make it possible to choose a
view looking away from the sun where otherwise there would
be little, if any, dark shades cast from objects or their parts.
Without cloud shadows, such views generally have a flat
appearance. This is not so good. Most compositions need

55
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

shaded parts of some sort to add variety and aid recession.
Cloud shadows then, contribute the needed quality.

There used to be a rule that wherever clouds are used in
the composition in considerable quantities, their shadows
should be placed on some part of the picture, and there is no
laudable reason why this rule cannot be applied today.

Cloud shadows add bigness or depth to most any view,
particularly those of great distances or heights.

Extreme brilliance in clouds presupposes that the land-
scape parts be treated partly or wholly in shadow. Sky lumi-
nosity generally invites accentuating. Since pigment is so
extremely limited, keeping the ground parts mainly in dark
values is practically the only method of bringing out the
sky brilliance.

By shadowing the ground, placing the horizon or land
contours low and keeping the proportions unequal are the
main postulates in cloud compositions.

In marine composition, the manner or style in painting
often has much to do with the arrangement of the parts.
For example, in most of the works of Frederick Waugh,
form is treated in a kind of plastic painting, the masses
being selected in a manner that will lend themselves to this
treatment. Even in his compositions that show only the main
body of sea water, the massiveness and weight of water
substance coincides with the handling of the pigment, while
on the other hand, the marines of Paul Dougherty and
William Ritschel show more of the softer vibrating qualities
of color and values. The two latter named painters often
produce fine qualities in bursting spray and moving foam
treated with closely related values and blending interspersed
with bits of color or light or dark accents. These light areas
are balanced by opposing darks in rocks which have vibra-
tion in color values and atmosphere.

The selection of parts of the marine view for the motive
is, of course, much like the selection of other views.
Whatever appeals as the most likely artistic interest should
be featured in the design. Since the eye sees the quickest

56
COURTESY OF THE GRAND CENTRAL GALLERIES, NEW YORK

THE BIG WATER

By FREDERICK J. WauGH

G While a definite circular observation is evident in this canvas there is a ‘hold
together’ quality that suggests the pattern or group mass idea. Massiveness in form,
power, strength and movement are well translated. Whatever quality may be lost by sharp
edges and plastic modeling is offset by the feeling of action, vitality and variety. Wherever
we see an example of Mr. Waugh’s work, a bold vigorous handling is always evident.
Realism perhaps but yet an artistic translation of realism. The artistry of a great painter

is revealed when the active violent moods of the sea are interpreted as in the above canvas.

57
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

motion first, breaking waves and spray are often selected
for the point of interest. Usually this action is against the
darker rocks, offering possibly the greatest contrast, which
adds more interest to the movement. Sometimes the cliffs
or headlands present strong interest with the sea only an
accessory to balance these. Again, the main attraction may
be partly submerged rocks or slowly moving foam on the top
of boiling water, or it may be the surf pounding on the
beach. Whatever appeals should be brought out. Interest
need not be in the main masses. A particular spot, a small
mass, a bit of spray lightened by sunlight, a rock or headland
surrounded by light values, the pattern of foam, or any of the
hundreds of items that can be seen.

Some marine views present great activity or movement.
At the same time the water is predominantly green, gray blue
or other cooler shades that have little vitalizing significance.
Therefore it is up to the artist to keep the shades from being
too cold. He must utilize some form of vibration, if possible,
with warmer colors.

Many marine artists wash their canvas in with burnt
sienna or other reddish earth colors, then build upon this
with perhaps bits of this warm foundation showing through
the subsequent painting. Even though a coolish appearance
pervades the picture, some vibration or opposition is
needed. A cool color predominance in the view and working
upon a white or light gray canvas is liable to cause an
unsympathetic feel in the picture; that is, unless the painter is
experienced and is aware of this danger, and can by good
judgment in using his paint prevent such a condition.
However, regardless of how well anyone may use color in the
above manner, the fact remains that a warm foundation
creates vibration and more depth. It also holds the colors
together in better unification and produces a balance
between the warm and cool shades. Every argument and
unlimited precedent are in favor of a warm undercoat for
marines (or any other subject), and not one is against it.

58
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

The danger of coldness in any picture is something that
should be forestalled.

BOATS

Usually all subjects associated with the sea are called
marines; however boats are so distinct and interesting they
rightfully deserve a name of their own.

Compared to landscapes or pictures of structures, boats
are more changeable; that is, they may be sailing, drifting,
or their sails may be furled or hoisted. Then again, their
reflection in the water is generally moving. However, all of
this may make them more difficult to compose than a
landscape. At the same time there is an advantage, as their
mobility permits considerable leeway in arranging groups.
Although variety in arrangements is somewhat more limited
than other outdoor subjects, boats are more easily placed
than trees, rocks or structures.

Plate I shows a number of boat sketches. Others by
Brangwyn and Manet can be seen on Plate [V and Thiebault
on Plate II. Also, on Plate V are boat deigns by Albert Ryder,
Harry Vincent, George Elmer Brown; Thieme and Hanson
can be seen on Plate VI. A number of ideas or improvisations
may be seen on Plate XV, one each on Plate XIV and Plate
XX; two on Plate XVII, and three on Plate XIX.

MAIN INTEREST IN THE COMPOSITION

The placement of the main point of attraction in
composition is important. Regardless of its location on the
canvas or whether it is large or small, it needs balance by its
surrounding parts. If the main attraction area is small the
rest of the picture should not overcome it by presenting
similar or equal interest. The principal attraction should
not be placed too near the edge of the canvas. This may
cause abruptness and lead the glance out of the picture.
Points of interest need balance or easement by lesser attrac-
tions placed at distances in two or more directions. The main

59
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

interest is a sort of radial spot around which revolves the
other masses and the more temporary resting places of the
eye. (Plate XII).

At times the composition may be so arranged especially
in the circle, pyramid, group mass or pattern type, that the
main design will hold the interest and induce the proper
travel of the glance without one particular point being
stresses. A compact design with variety in the masses thus
creates both interest and harmony.

Unity is the goal and a small bit will often unite the
whole arrangement. A small dark note or contrast placed in
a strategic position will oftimes balance the surrounding
areas even it these areas are dark also.

Isolated small points of interest are very effective when
placed on fields of lighter values. For example, small boats
on a broad expanse of sea draws the attention immediately
though there might be even darker rocks or land formations
in the foreground. Small dark objects or figures may be
placed on a large foreground or middle distance covered with
snow or sand. The extreme distance, foreground or other
areas may be in dark masses, even darker than the small
items of interest, yet the latter will still hold the attention.

Where a small interest rests on a light field which is
partly or wholly surrounded by contrasting masses or lines,
some attachment of the interest should be directed to one
side or another. This may be in nearness or by having lines
or lesser masses placed between the small interest and the
surrounding parts. At any rate, the idea is to cause the glance
to move toward one section and not be confused by equal
spacing on either side of the chief small interest. Spaces
between masses and points of interest are to be considered as
well as masses or objects.

Special notes of interest like a house, barn, bridge, mill
or any structure, always adds to picturesqueness. Figures or
animals generally create a central point of interest also,
if they are included in the picture. One thing might be
remembered when these are used, and that is the glance of

60
19

SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

the viewer usually follows toward the direction faced by
figures or animals. Therefore it is a good plan to have them
face toward the central part of the canvas, especially if they
are near its edge. While they are usually the main point of
attraction, figures or animals should never be forced out too
strongly, but should be well integrated into the design.

Figure or animal painting was developed long before the
landscape became recognized as a subject for pictorial work.
Landscapes were at first used only as a background for
figures. As time when on, more and more consideration was
given to picturing outdoor views. Some of the early painters
gave these equal prominence with figures. Even in this day
most European outdoor painters generally include small
figures or animals in their outdoor paintings. Constable,
Turner, Corot, East and others realized the value of bits of
animate nature in their outdoor paintings. Americans as a
rule are not so much given to this practice, although figures
of animals are often valuable in adding a note of especial
interest or in establishing scale.

DRAWING

The arranging of any parts for unity always depends on
capable artistic draughtsmanship, yet while artistic drawing
must respect fundamental accuracy, it does not demand
exactness. If art demanded only a precise and accurate copy
of nature, the camera could take the place of freehand
sketching. Work done with the camera may be considered
good drawing from a precision standpoint, but not from an
artistic viewpoint. The inaccuracy resulting from artistic
leeway, esthetic taste and judgment is what determines
quality in drawing in fine art.

Departure from the literal aspect, rather than mech-
anical exactness, is the code of the true artist. However,
departures are the result of studied intent rather than
inability. The average artist, if he chooses, could render an
exact drawing of what he sees. Artistic work not only allows

62
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

but demands some deviation from form and line. Just how
far this may go depends on the viewpoint of each painter.

In order to form a basis for study, we might classify
the approaches to composition, from the drawing
standpoint, into several categories. The mode of composi-
tion is generally influenced by the manner of drawing, and
vise versa.

One method of approach to creating unity in arrange-
ment to consider mainly the mass principle with full model-
ing and dimensional effects with a smaller consideration for
line. A second general approach is through a more decorative
treatment, with little or no regard for depth or modeling.
A third method could be more of the linear application and
less thought given to values, mass or recession. The variation
within and between each of these approaches and the
combination of two or more of them should about cover
the field; at least the classification gives a starting point
for study.

MASS PRINCIPLE

Practically all artists who write on painting in a broad
impressionistic manner stress the importance of thinking in
masses and the great quality to be derived from a simple
organization of the main areas.

A broad manner of composing or painting depends on
a broad impression of the view. Both this and the picture
should be observed with the eyes squinted, in order to create
the necessary “feel” for bigness in the main unity as well
as in the relation of the parts thereto. Also proportion, direc-
tion of line, values and color can be best approximated in
this manner.

The mass idea is conducive to holding the attention on
the picture as a whole. It creates an abstract interval between
the realistic detail of nature and a broad impression on the
canvas. This interval represents the artist’s ability to see
nature in a big way, to conceive large mass ideas, and paint

63
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

broadly with large brushes. A broad impression with little
detail is an abstract of nature.

The charm of broadly painted pictures lies in the fact
that the viewer must use his imagination; he then feels the
abstract impression as intended by the artist.

In placing mass arrangement we should think more in
terms of mass and form instead of lines. The “hold together”
quality by value, mass and space arrangement is important
here. Therefore the idea is to lose or disguise line and edges
in order that we can feel form in terms of shape or bulk
instead of outline.

A suggestive or sketchy drawing is the best base for
breadth in painting. This aids materially in developing the
facility to grasp the large aspects and translate them broadly.
It also helps to get away from the habit formed by many
students of drawing a rigid outline around each object, then
filling in these boundaries with color — an inartistic habit,
easily enough formed but difficult to get rid of.

One good idea to apply to any kind of drawing is to
make the preliminary marks very light — the surface barely
touched, a dot here and a broken line there made between the
greater measurements. At the same time it allows subsequent
correction and alteration to be made without erasure.
The mental concept of form is best held when light touches
are made between gestures. This practice also gives
confidence and assurance to the depictor. A sketchy sugges-
tive drawing for the base of painting induces more drawing
with the brush. Drawing should not be left off with the
compositional plan, but always considered up to the final
brush stroke. Another thing about the sketchily drawn base
for painting is that it gives more opportunity to exercise
invention as the work goes along. While it is advisable to
have the main plan well established in the mind, the smaller
parts are better left to be decided upon later. Small items are
beyond the limitation of memory; besides, there is always
charm in unexpected accidentals.

64
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

What is said here about the mass idea in composition is tak-
ing the extreme of this principle for illustration. It is not
intended to convey the thought that line has no part in the
plan or that the broad mass idea is the only method of
composing. Full unity in any kind of picture can hardly do
away with line or edge altogether. The mass principle in
arrangement merely calls for a maximum, not necessarily the
total disguise of edge or line. There might be danger of a
“woolly” condition or a sentimental appearance to the work
if the softening of edges or blending is carried too far. Some
accentuating of line or edge is needed in nearly all pictures.

Stressing mass arrangement and suppression of line
brings out the quality in the indefiniteness in the edge of
form, while contours or strong boundaries reveal the beauty,
grace, rhythm, proportion and other linear characteristics
of objects.

Thus we may seek to produce one desirable quality only
to find that in stressing one quality it overrides or destroys
another. This inevitably brings each problem back to a
solution by the individual.

In composing he may consider what particular quality
he aspires for, and utilize either line or mass, or both, to
attain this end. If he seeks the quality that comes from the
indefiniteness of form and edges, the artist must sacrifice at
least some line, and if he prefers the rhythmic flow of line in
patterns of line design, he is forced to lose some values in
form. If the painter desires to use the qualities that come
from both, it is up to him to decide the measure of each.

DECORATIVE APPROACH

The decorative type of painting is, of course, like all
other styles, difficult if not impossible to define in an exact
category, However, it is used here to denote those methods of
picturing which does not utilize much recession or modeling
but considers more of a flat mass design. The dependence is

65
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

mainly on grace and rhythm in line, variety in color, and less
interest on values.

Decorative painting may embrace conventionalized
form or adhere rather closely to nature. Sometimes a poster-
like manner with all areas flat and unbroken is used; or
again, these may be handled with each brush mark separated
by visible bits of the under painting. In this style, form may
have strong outlines filled in with spots of broken color, or
flat areas may be outlined strongly with lines all the same
width; like, for instance some of Brangwyn’s murals. The
edges of flat areas are sometimes softened, slight modeling
employed and some perspective used in certain styles of
decorative painting.

The decorative type of painting or composing is not
used extensively in easel pictures but rather more for murals
or panels intended for decorative purpose.

LINEAR DESIGN

In composing, and particularly in linear design, some
thought of the influence and significance of line is necessary.
Line may be placed in three general divisions: vertical,
horizontal, and slanting or curved. The vertical line is
emblematic of great height, stability and nobility. The
horizontal denotes repose and tranquility. The slanting or
curve indicates movement or activity and rhythm.

In order to create full unity, every composition should
have at least some indication of all types of lines. Often a
view will present many lines of one kind without proper
opposition support or interception. Unless these predomi-
nant lines are balanced they might create discord in the
unification. Too many straight upright lines with little or
no interference may produce a static, immobile feeling,
while a preponderance of lateral lines might destroy vitality;
and overabundance of curves could cause the glance to
travel too swiftly.

66
OUTDOOR SKETCHES BY THE AUTHOR
67
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

The term “straight line” is used here in its artistic
sense. It does not mean rule-straight line. An absolutely
straight line or a perfect circle represents the farthest depar-
ture from artistic drawing. Artistic straight lines are those
lines which run in a general straight direction without having
mechanical exactness; edges that are varied by softening
and accentuating.

Feeling will unconsciously react to the significance of
various types of line and the glance will unconsciously follow
the unbroken line. The principle of line influence is to create
balance and to cause the eye to wander slowly over the can-
vas, pausing temporarily on the main interest and less on the
smaller points. Therefore, lines need to be intercepted or bro-
ken to keep the glance from wandering out of the picture or
to places where it is not intended to go. Some excuse can
always be found to utilize line so that the eye will be held in
its proper course. By the same token, some interference of
line may be used to keep the glance from being too speedy.

The transitory line or imaginary pathway between
objects represents an abstract element in drawing. These
unseen pathways lead the glance across spaces between mass
or objects. Items may be place on or near the pathway to aid
in the eye travel. The transitory line contributes a distinct
quality to any type of composition.

The purely linear motive in composition need not be
limited to line drawing with pencil or charcoal. Oil paint
lends itself admirably. Some painters adopt the linear
principle in painting.

In this mode, beautiful contours and compound curves
may be interwound with straight lines into fine harmony.
In some forms of linear planning, a variety of grouped
lines may be created; also variety may be produced by
keeping some groups quite compact, while others may be
more loosely arranged. All over patterns may be made with
lines, either with or without a central point of interest.

One quality in all linear drawings might be kept in
mind, that is, compactness. All parts relate more easily if

68
Grouped Mass

Grouped Mass

Grouped Mass

ahawe
ave

Leen

Se
wis

ad,

ANE
Ve
ain

SUBJECT.

NG

I. — THREE EXAMPLES OF VARYING OR REARRANGI

69
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

connected by at least a few lines. Isolated parts are very
likely to detract if they have no attachment to the main
groups. The linear design may or may not embody consider-
able recession or line perspective.

Variation of the broad impressionistic, decorative and
linear modes of picturing are almost as great in number as
the artists who paint. The intention here is not to draw sharp
lines between modes of picturing or attempt to place all
manners of working in strict definition. The purpose is to
reduce the methods of approach to picturization to the least
numeration, in order that the student may decide his
leanings. Everyone has his likes and dislikes: some lean
toward one thing and some another. This is part of individ-
uality. No one can hope to paint or compose in every man-
ner. Originality is dependent on one general course.

PERSPECTIVE

Recession, or the feeling that the picture extends back
from the canvas surface, and the feeling that objects have
roundness are illusions essential to three-dimensional
painting. These illusions are accomplished by consideration
of and the utilization of several factors. Chief among these
are atmosphere, graduation of values, contrasts of tone
and color, the placing of dark and light masses and linear
perspective.

Though the painter does not need to adhere to exactness
in perspective like the architect, he does have to respect the
main principles of line recession.

In beginning the composition, the first consideration is
the location of the horizon or eye-level line on the canvas.
The station point of the painter generally determines its
placement. Normally, in picturing in level country, the
horizon would be placed low, although the artist may place
it most any reasonable distance from the top or bottom of
the canvas, provided it is not in the exact center. Some
painters suggest that one-third (of the canvas width) up from
the bottom edge is a good average for level country. However,

70
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

even three-fifths, probably, in many cases could hardly cause
a too-equal division.

Wherever the horizon is placed, this eye-level line is the
vanishing place of the diminution lines of objects on level
ground; also all spirit level perspective lines of architectural
structures, regardless of the elevation of the structure or the
station-point of the painter. (Plate XI). However, the lines of
diminution of objects and all lines that are not spirit-level
lines, such as roads, fences, etc., recede to points above
the slanting planes upon which they exist. Slanting planes in
this instance mean the slopes of hills, or rolling country.
(Plate XI).

If the artist is on a high elevation and the view is more
or less panoramic the horizon should be placed near the top
of the canvas or, in any event, no more that three-fifths
(entire canvas width) down from the top edge.

In outdoor views, that do not contain man-made
structures, the painter may place his horizon at almost any
place except the center, and merely assume he is on a certain
elevation. When structures with level lines exist, the horizon
must be placed to conform. Streets, buildings and even boats
have a way of dictating where the horizon shall be placed.

Occasionally the vanishing points of buildings may be
beyond the confines of the canvas. Here the artist must
employ judgment in disguising perspective lines, so the eye
will remain in the picture.

Outside of furnishing the quality of depth, perspective
is one means of diverting the glance momentarily from the
main interest and leading it to the distance and beyond which
represents infinity.

If the interest is in or near the foreground the glance
or feeling, figuratively speaking, travels to the distance
and back again the same as it travels from left to right and
vertically. There would be little need of the third dimension
indications if this were not so.

After the glance has rested temporarily on the main
interest, whether this is in the foreground masses or

71
Cc. Ryder, Circle

GC. Le A- Smit
Group Mass

I I APL
wae: POLS:
Ee

ye

: Care
Nichols, G

4,

Wendt, Group Mass =a - a
Ben Foster, Circle

or Steelyard

IJ. — COMPOSITION BY AMERICAN ARTISTS

74
ra. n, Circle Courbet,
r Pattern Diagonal Line

onstable, Circle
r Steelyard

ow &
cag

le
KS

2
,
1G
=
ie

iS -

Th 2 ere 4 Millet, Ell or ae.
pl Circle or Steelyard gteelyard Yan Marcke, Pattern
a ;

q

o
7

CLI 7

Constable, £11 or
Steelyard

Mass

pies rire,

S72 Late

Monet, Steelyard Rousseau, Silhouette

ow

Hans Heysen, Circle
or Tunnel

= -— —

rt; Cazin, Steelyard
or Group Mass

IV. — ARRANGEMENT OF PICTURE DESIGN, EUROPEAN ARTISTS

75
:2u

7
Let er

a- =

G E. Browne, Circle

Chauncev vader » Circle

perenne oD

amas <.

Albert Ryder, Group
Mass or Silhouette

Vincent, Pattern Borg, Circle
or Group Mass or Silhouette

Paul Lauritz,
Group Mass

Puthuff, S or Grou ‘Mass.

Waugh, Group Mass

V. — PICTORIAL PLANS, AMERICAN ARTISTS

76
at

Hanson, Silhouette

: ra i Sm
Borg, Group Mass
or Steelyard

OB pg or oer.
5 SAS oe

i eS:

Garber, Circle Metcalf, Pattern
or Pattern

i ee

Johnson, Pattern

Gircle

Carlson,
or Tunnel

— es

Se
Ritschel,
Pattern

Granville Smith,.
Pattern , Circle

VI. — COMPOSITION BY AMERICAN ARTISTS

77
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

grass in the near parts of the picture. The latter will stand
much more detail and a heavier modeling with pigment,
while the sky will need smoother painting. The method of
creating perspective by indicating foreground detail with
heavy painting and smooth painting in distance is rather
more of a general custom than an exceptional one. Many
painters have long realized the value and charm that comes
with this practice.

Often the foreground masses or their parts will be quite
dark against the sky or light distance, giving fine contrast,
and adding vitality to recession. However, this needs some
easement by a graduated series of values elsewhere in the pic-
ture which will lead more gently to distance.

Abrupt changes are not always confined to strong con-
trasts. On some occasions, especially in a panoramic view, a
lengthy horizon, either straight or undulating, may be seen.
This might present an abruptness without an in-between
value to ease the ground parts into the sky. In such cases, the
artist must perforce use his imagination. Perhaps a higher
station point may reveal a distant hazy hill or other object
which suggests a light mass value. (Plate XJ). If nothing
appears in the view that can be transferred to the place
of abruptness it is always the privilege of the artist to
introduce trees, shrubs or other items that conform to
local characteristics.

The top contours of mountains or hills often present
this kind of problem, particularly where the contour of
upper areas are rather dark in value. To relieve this, there
might be found aa more distant peak in lighter value or
perhaps growths may be placed or clouds may appear or be
introduced to relieve the abrupt edge. Instead of any of these
items the principle of lost and found treatment may be
invoked; that is, the edges may be softened considerably in
one place and accend in another. This applies to both the
horizon and hill contour. This edge-variation created its own
charm besides holding the glance in the picture and to the
rhythm of the design.

78
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION
VALUES

Dark and light usually refers to the range of values in
the entire design while light and shade generally denote the
lighted and shaded parts of single items. Both light and dark
and light and shade are active factors in composition.

The primary elements of the tonal scale are dark light
and the halfway shade or half-tone. No modeling can be
made with less than these three. Only one-half of any solid,
rounded object may be seen or pictured from a given point.
The visual facets cannot be modeled with only two of these
primary shades. However, with the addition of the third,
modeling may be roughly indicated and by the use of other
intervening shades full picturization of the visual part of
form can be made.

The lighted parts of objects are modified by the light
cast upon them while the shaded parts are altered by the
absence of light. The halfway tone between these two shades
may be called the true value of the object.

Light always creates values. Even on cloudy days out of
doors there are always variations of shades in form.
Modeling may be discerned even in moonlight or twilight
in fact, if there is light enough to see, modeling and values
are always present.

Values have a decided attraction of their own, entirely
separate from color. This may often be seen in the photo-
graphic copies of paintings. These copies many times reveal
qualities which do not show in the original. One reason for
this is that values have a more massed appearance and the
main areas are more unified. Another reason is the deepest
dark in the painting may be much lighter than the darkest
pigment, yet it will show up black in the photograph, there-
fore causing much more contrast and vitality.

Tonality plays a considerable part in stimulating
emotions. Sharp contrasts of extreme dark and light cause
an agitated feeling, while the more closely related gradua-
tions produce a restful feeling. It is interesting, for instance,

79
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

to observe alternate black and white squares, like a chess-
board, projected by a stereopticon on a screen. The eye has
great difficulty in focusing on both values at the same time.
Another set may be projected in which the squares are both
nearly the same shade. Immediately more ease is felt; the eye
is kept more nearly to the same focus.

Contrasting color has the same reaction. The use of red
and green squares, or other opposite pairs, creates a sense of
considerable agitation; whereas, if a neutralizing agent is
used such as a dark or light tone or color, bringing the con-
trast in closer relationship, the excitation disappears. It seems
that a certain focal adjustment is needed to meet the speed of
travel of rays from both color and values.

The reaction from contrasts in values and color is what
creates vitality in pictorial work. The analogous values and
analogous colors produce the feeling of restfulness.

The key of the selected tonal scale on the palette is
determined by the modification of the darkest dark or the
lightest light. This key may be low, high, or within the
middle register.

The tonal scale in the picture is the basis for modeling,
therefore an important construction factor in building the
picture. We may, as an illustration of the value stem,
consider the picture built upon a foundation of values
ranging from the lowest dark to white, with various amounts
of color in each value.

Incidentally, it is well to consider the worth of one dark
for the whole picture. Neutral gray is preferable to black. The
neutral can be modified to suit any color scheme, then used
throughout the work in all the extreme darks as well as for
making lighter grays. The great advantage of one prepared
dark for the whole picture is that it will hold the color in
harmony and simplify painting. Mixing the extreme dark
and the light grays each time they are needed is not only
troublesome but often causes discord.

In considering any scale of values for painting, one fact
must be kept in mind and that is the great discrepancy

80
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

between the light out of doors and that of pigment. The
former may be as great as four hundred to one, while the
latter is only about fifty to one. This brings the extreme dark
and light shades closer in the picture. Consequently the near-
related shades are brought even closer together. This truth
can easily escape attention, yet it is important when reducing
the tonal scale relations and graduations on the canvas.
As example, we might say the dark of a tree trunk would
represent the lowest end of the tonal scale outdoors, the
darkest pigment may be forty degrees lighter than this; there-
fore, the painted tree trunk is forty degrees nearer the lighter
values of the tree in the picture. Carrying this idea further
into the higher valued areas, for instance, in clouds, the same
ratio would prevail here, the pigment representation would
bring the extreme light values forty degrees closer to the
extreme dark shades.

The influences of refraction also add to this bringing
together of close values. Modeling, accents and highlight for
these reasons are greatly affected. Although in the view,
accents or highlights may actually be contrasting and stand
out strongly, the student needs always to remind himself that
his full pigment scale is more limited than in nature and
working with only part of pigment scale restricts that much
more. Even though full scale in pigment is used the relation
of values within each mass in the picture must be very much
closer than those outdoors. Without consideration for these
facts, the student is likely to over-model or make his accents
and highlights too strong.

Almost any view, if it does not have atmosphere, may
have a considerable range of tone and full play of definite
sharp contrasts, accents, highlights and closely related
shades. Yet the painter may bring all of these nearer together
by limiting his scale toward the dark or light ends, or wholly
within the middle register. In a limited scale either the light
or dark saturates all values, thus bringing the whole into
more unity.

81
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

In order to aid in creating tonal harmony, many painters
work within a restricted tonal scale. To clarify this idea we
might say the full range of shades in pigment is ten points.
Corot made many of his pictures within a range of six to
nine points while Constable in some of his compositions
employed only the points from four to nine. Monet and oth-
ers of the Luminist School went ever further by using merely
two points of the scale. Frank Tenney Johnson, in his moon-
lights, employed not over three points and Childe Hassam
possibly used no more than this number.

The great range out of doors and the reduced pigment
scale creates a problem that often tests the ingenuity of the
painter. He must rely on taste and judgment in arranging the
sequences or graduations. Nature in most cases furnishes
suggestion for the tonal scale. For instance, the subject may
be in a very light key, a hazy aspect created by atmosphere
which brings up the dark and tones down the light; or per-
haps a brilliant sunlight with few shadows which might
appear extremely light. Both these instances may call for a
key near the white or light end of the scale. In other extreme
cases, such as the deep tone of a gloaming or moonlight,
the key may be held down near the dark end of tonal range.
Still again, the view may be best depicted with the full range
of the pigment scale. Whatever the view suggests, approxi-
mately true gradation, even though reduced from that of the
view, should prevail throughout the work, regardless of the
selected key.

Full picturization with dimensional and complete
modeling effects generally calls for the use of most shades in
any selection. As parts of the view recede to distance each
section needs its graduating general value, which brings
all values into closer relationship within each section and
nearer to the values of distance or sky parts. Generally the
darkest darks and the purest light are seen in the foreground
parts. At other times larger dark masses may be in the
distance or middle distance. Even then small dark accents,
darker than those in the distance, should be placed in

82
Ma

y ,
ry \

Hills Featured

terial for Several Pictures

AN lis
SWS }

pent

UF
WON wae ae

a
at

83

VII. — SELECTING PART OF THE VIEW

— INTERC

HANGE

Interchange

» ah

Sky Selected

Foreground Motive

IBY, Z ?

SS)

“es

SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

the foreground. Such accents add to perspective and
picturesqueness. Usually an excuse can be found to place
these dark notes in rocks, weeds, grass, or other items.

Every good composition contains three or four main
values. One of these masses is the darkest and one is the
lightest, while others are near half tone or indicated with the
intermediate shades. This does not necessarily mean that
these main darks and lights are first painted in the extreme of
the selected scale, as deeper accents and lighter highlights
within the larger areas will undoubtedly be needed. If the
main area values have first been approximated and placed,
the more subtle shades, modeling, darker accents and lighter
bits are more easily determined.

Aside from the relating of the tonal values, color must
be considered at the same time. On one hand, color may be
placed in a broken manner almost to the exclusion of gray,
and on the other extreme color may be saturated with gray
until it is almost nonexistent.

Pure tonal harmonies with subdued color have
undeniable charm. Whistler was a master at handling this
kind of harmony. No one can say that in his work he lacked
harmonious quality. Many painters work with a considerable
tendency toward a full gray saturation and achieve fine
harmony. However, the qualities crated by a heavy dominant
gray are always produced at the sacrifice of the vibration and
contrasts of the purer color.

INTERCHANGE

Interchange or the transition of one value into the field
of another is often the source of great charm in composition.
(Plate VII). This is especially true if one or both values
graduate from intermediate shades. Extreme shades always
appear more intense when they occur on or in close
proximity to their opposites. This is one instance where a
natural quality becomes an artistic quality.

84
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

Interchange may be a principal feature of composition
or it may be only a contributing quality. Cloud shadows on
parts of the landscape may be seen against light areas,
suggesting a strong contrast as the main motive for balance.
Large dark masses may have their footing on the medium
values of the foreground, then enter an extremely light sky
where they will appear more intense. Brilliant clouds might
occur in the sky area creating even more contrast. Views
looking toward the sun generally present opportunities for
extreme darks against a light sky area.

The reversal of the main masses may be considered a
form of the interchange principle. This means the main dark
masses may be transposed and occupy the same shape or
area of the dark. (Plate X).

Hills or mountains may graduate to extreme darks
against the sky. Light tree trunks, such as those of aspen,
birch or sycamore, generally present opportunity to observe
interchange. These often present an illusion of values
changing by contrast, especially if there are dark masses
existing beyond their lower parts and light sky behind the
upper forms. Again, the reversal of this may be observed; for
instance, dark trunks may rest on a snow-covered foreground
and appear lighter above.

After anyone has employed interchange, its occurrence
in nature becomes more readily apparent and its importance
in picturing is better realized. The play of light objects on
one field reaching over into a field of dark, and vice versa, is
generally taken advantage of by all schools of painting.
The interchange of values creates vitality and charm in
painting and should be accepted and used wherever an
excuse presents itself. Although perhaps less noticeable, the
abrupt contrast or interchange of color as well as its slower
transition by blending or graduation also contributes
to picturesqueness.

COLOR
Perhaps color might be called a non-essential factor in

85
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

composition, since unity may be created without it. However,
it adds very important quality and definitely aids in complete
pictorial unification. Without color any full representation
loses one of its main attractions.

Many ideas and theories of color have been presented.
The only theory that interests the student is the one that may
be of some help in learning color principles — ideas that may
be applied in a practical way in painting.

The red, yellow and blue theory seems to come nearer
to this purpose than any of the others, yet it has a fault
common to all spectrum ideas. Spectrum theories are
usually based on color light rays, while pigment is an opaque
material. Transparent color light rays may be overlapped,
producing secondaries which retain clarity. While in mixing
the pigment spectrum the secondaries are rather grayish or
lifeless in color, yet the spectrum idea nevertheless may add
materially in studying color principles.

Considering color in its primary parts, we have red,
yellow and blue. Taking equal parts of two primaries, we
create the secondaries — orange, green and purple. The
secondaries are complementary to the remaining primary; .
orange is complementary to blue, green to red and purple to
yellow.

If the red, yellow and blue are chromatically equalized
on the spectrum, one part of each, mixed together, should
make neutral. When opposites or complementaries are
mixed, they should make the same gray. However, the
proportions are different, as two parts of a secondary are
needed to one part of its opposing primary. For instance, if
to purple (which is one part red and one part blue) is added
one part yellow, equal proportions are the result.

Some consider color balance and color harmony the
same thing. Perhaps they are where color is used for some
purposes, but in pictorial representation it would be
difficult to employ balance of pure colors without some form
of modification. Balance with color means a balance

86
87

VIII. — SELECTING

MASSES

Shadowed Parts Dominant

Sega OS
Se

Trees Mainly in Light

Fa
ae
%
A?

About Two Thirds Dark

ThRuny

iN

Una)

About Two Thirds Light

HA

a

"

\ NSS

Light Values Predominating

Be

ia

NESS

LAR ESE
RRA

\ ea)
N S

thee;

Visine,

2d
Shaded Parts Dominant

a

SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

between opposites, or the primaries alone constitute one
form of balance.

This analysis is a scientific one, and since three equal
proportions of each primary does not approach a half-and-
half equality, this might be one place where a scientific
formula may be an artistic one. It may be possible to employ
these three portions to create color balance artistically, yet
colors balanced by pairs of opposites have greater leeway as
almost any proportion of each complement may be used.
Example: ten parts of purple to two parts of yellow, or vice
versa, or three blue and twelve orange. The more pure colors
are in balance of opposites the more vitality they create, the
more gray they become, the more feeling of repose.

Curiously enough, in nearly all picture work we seek the
tonal scale to achieve real harmony in color. True, analogous
pure colors can produce harmony. But it is seldom, if ever,
analogous pure colors only could be employed in painting,
therefore it may be said that only one method can be used in
creating harmony of color in pictorial work. Namely the
saturation of all colors used with a color, shade, tint or white.

Provided the principle of unequal measures is respected,
there is considerable leeway in both balance and harmony of
color for pictorial use. Balance may be achieved by a tiny bit
or large quantity of an opposite, or the saturation of one
shade, tint or white may be extremely light or extremely
heavy. In fact, one dominant tone or color may entirely
exclude any opposite; this is, of course harmony without
balance. However, balance by opposite color adds vitality,
interest and picturesqueness to any work.

A complete harmony and balance should have a well-
thought-out plan in the proportions of the opposites — an
artistic inequality of complementaries with a dominant
color, shade or tint throughout. For example, suppose we
take yellow and purple combination, use either of these as
the largest proportion, then mix a tint of yellow as the
dominating vehicle; this brings the purple and all other
colors used into the harmony of the yellow. On the other

88
89

IX. — THINGS TO BE AVOIDED IN COMPOSING

Growded design

Centered Hor

Scattered Objects—

izon

Three Equal Divisions

Trees on a Line

Too Many Parallel Lines

Equal Spacing

Equal Masses

Centered Objects

Lines too Near Edge of Picture

Canvas Halved

Equal Spacing of Masses

“Vos;
Weare

1}
aS

20) AINE
8, >, p
Oo f
Thana}
OR GB
5
R A, DHAQDES| x
3 xP P P 8.
TINTS
BIT

M
Pure Coler Circle— Gorresponding Numbers
Indicate Opposites or Complementarics

DIAGRAM FOR SPECTRUM

90
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

hand, a purple tint may be used, bringing the yellow and
other colors to a purplish harmony. In both cases, harmony
and balance have been produced. Other opposites may be
employed, for example: greenish-yellow and purplish-red;
orange-yellow and purplish-blue; or any of the other oppo-
sites in the pure color circle.

Of course, if we study color in this manner it is neces-
sary to construct a color chart of experimentation. This is
not as difficult as it may appear. The circular form is praci-
cal. (See diagram page 90). The yellow may be made with
light cadmium yellow and a touch of medium cadmium yel-
low; the red with medium cadmium red and alizarin, the blue
with about three parts ultramarine blue, one part of
turquoise blue. To prove these, equal parts of the red, yellow
and blue should make neutral.

Now come the secondaries. To get the approximate
shade of green, equal parts of yellow and blue are used. The
orange is made of red and yellow, and the purple of equal
parts of red and blue. If the primaries balance, these second-
aries should be about right. However, as had been
stated, such mixtures lack clarity. To overcome this, these
secondaries may be remade to approximate the shade and
color of those made by the above mixtures. The green can be
created with viridian and a small bit of light cadmium
yellow; the purple with cobalt violet, alizarin and cobalt
blue; the orange with light cadmium red. If this set is
balanced and graduated properly, all colors will have clarity
and strength. The tertiaries and other intervening colors
in the pure color circle will have clearness also. The
experimenter may then mix, intermix, and graduate these in
each direction, carry them out as far as he cares to go.
He may add as many colors to the pure color circle as he
chooses, then create as many shades as he likes towards the
neutral. The tints towards white may also be great in number.

Naturally, the study of the spectrum involves consider-
able care. Certain graduations or proportions are to be
observed. One main rule is that the primaries and secondar-

91
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

ies balance. This may be proven first by mixing equal parts of
the primaries to make a neutral dark (which must be brought
up with white to judge its color), then two parts of a second-
ary should be mixed with one part of its primary opposite to
get the same neutral. The second rule is that the transitions
between colors in the pure color circle and between these to
neutral and white should be gradual, with no abruptness
anywhere on the chart. It is regretted that space here will
allow only a slight reference to spectrum experimentation.
However, there are many good books on color and the
serious student might well read every one of them.

There is no doubt that color theories will always be a
subject for debate. Yet there are undeniable truths about the
red, yellow and blue spectrum theory that may be used in a
practical way in painting pictures. If the experimenter can
learn one or several basic facts about color by making a color
chart and practicing with analogous and complementary col-
ors, any amount of time spent in such occupation is well
worth while.

Learning by experience to make a spectrum that
balances and a neutral that is really neutral gives some
valuable knowledge which is useful to anyone who paints
pictures. If the student can learn to classify the opposite
colors and reduce the contrast of complementaries by inject-
ing a small amount of one opposite into another, he has
learned a valuable principle. He probably will have learned
another great principle which is most important of all — that
is, a saturation with a modified color, a shade or white will
always hold any group of colors in harmony.

Previously mixing a large amount of dominant shade,
then injecting it in every color used is sometimes called the
“soup” method, but whatever name it is given it is a great
help not only in developing taste but in creating harmony.

Black is used a great deal in pictorial work but unfortu-
nately it does not have real affinity with color. A neutral
shade answers the purpose much better. True, an absolute
neutral is almost impossible to make. Yet a dark gray made

92
SI 3
Mass Balanced
by Interest

by ——— ‘.
Parallel Curves

Straight Lines
Predominating

Curved Lines
Featured

We
SYBs (eS
(

7
eB

aaa a

Equal Openings One Main Opening soatasine Lanes

Ny

SSH

4
A 3

SEY

ey

i

oa
Moab

Reversal of Mass Values } Single Interest

X. — IDEAS FOR ALTERATION OR SELECTION

93
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

with Indian red, ultramarine blue and a portion of a yellow
added makes a very satisfactory dark for the palette. This
dark can be modified with other colors to suit the color
scheme or with white to suit the value scale.

The word “gray” as used here does not always mean one
made with pure neutral or black and white. A tan, brown or
russet may be called warm gray. Any shade may be said to be
gray when it contains more than one-half dark (neutral or
black) than color. Therefore a gray may be still gray and con-
tain considerable color. A gray may be warm, cool or lean
toward any color. There are thousands of grays, yet when we
realize that they can all be approximated with a dark, white
and the three primary colors, our method of producing the
various grays is simplified.

While it is possible to feature a pure color sensation
without considering grays, almost every well-known painter
uses grays in some form. Homer, Wyant, Ranger, Ryder,
Birge Harrison and a host of other artists employed a
saturation of one shade or tint.

One important thing to be thought of in painting
outdoor pictures is the very great difference in the color seen
outdoors and pigment on the canvas. Color in sunlight
outdoors may even be as great as two or three hundred times
more intense or brilliant than paint in pigment. Sometimes
outdoors it is actually the source of color rays. The writer
had the experience of seeing a red truck pass the studio
window. The reflection not only appeared first on one wall
but a second time on another. This gives some idea of the
great luminosity of sunlighted color as compared to pigment
indoors. It also shows the fallacy of attempting realism in
color rendition. In outdoor views strong brilliant colors are
not the rule but the exception.

When an extremely bright or intense color is seen and
the artist wishes to feature it he needs only to remember that
its strength or refraction covers a considerable area. It will
pervade other colors around it. Therefore some of the main
color should be included in the surrounding colors in order

94
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

to maintain harmony. Still life pictures that represent fabrics,
fruits or flowers generally need a different palette than out-
door views. The most brilliant colors may be used in such
compositions. Yet even here contrasts of brilliant color gen-
erally need a pervading shade to hold them together.

Striving for exactness in color, as it is seen in nature, is
often the source of difficulty for the beginner. Yet he should
realize several important points. The first is that not much
pure color exists outdoors, and the second is that when pure
color does exist no pigment on the canvas can come
anywhere near its intensity outdoors; third, any color combi-
nation in nature can be pictured with great leeway as the
individual colors are only relative in each harmony. Another
matter is that color is only one factor in painting. Values and
drawing should net be forgotten when concentrating on
color. Finally, efficiency in judging and using color does not
come readily or of its own accord. Much study, experimenta-
tion and experience is needed. Color, being visual, has some
advantage over other factors in art. While most of the
principles in painting are disguised, color and color
harmony can be definitely seen and studied in pictures, in the
spectrum and out of doors.

Unity in composing requires that attention be given to
all factors. The harmony of color, its brilliance or modifica-
tion should be in full agreement with the general quality,
rhythm and picturesqueness of the whole canvas.

THE PALETTE

The selection of colors for the palette is like many other
factors in painting — subject to the individual’s taste and
needs. The reason the spectrum idea is set forth here is it
gives laws or the basic principles of color. No other method
furnishes any authentic principles. Color is, without a doubt,
a scientific subject and has positive governing laws; therefore
we can learn these basic laws and use them to aid us in
developing our instinctive taste and judgment.

95
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

It is not necessary to employ the spectrum set of colors
on the palette; any set that fills the requirements of the
painter can be used. Naturally, he must choose pigments that
are permanent. The next important matter is a simple
palette; the fewer colors, the more easily they are controlled.
Those who like clarity in color generally keep away from
siennas, umbers and the more drab shades.

A good set of colors for the palette is light cadmium yel-
low, orange cadmium yellow, light and deep cadmium red,
viridian, ultramarine blue and Indian red. Although many
use zinc and lead whites, the new white made of zinc or other
light bodies and titanium appears to be the best of all.

Almost every painter uses a different set of colors. The
student should try many palettes in order that he can find
one suited to his particular mode and temperament.

RHYTHM

Rhythm comes mainly from a receptive state of mind,
which is usually brought about by what is seen and felt.
When viewing the various aspects of nature we find that
which coincides with our own moods, or this may be the
other way around: the scene may create the mood. To enjoy
nature and its depiction, the viewer needs to be in tune with
her. Being in tune does not mean that individuality is surren-
dered. This must be preserved if full and complete rhythm,
unity and enjoyment are to be realized. To feel the spirit of
nature is to feel the rhythmic, spiritual flow which encircles
animate and inanimate nature — the rhythm of life and
the universe.

Sometimes a view will reveal a lazy stream winding
through gently moving foliage, with distant meadows,
shadowless hills, all perhaps enveloped in hazy atmosphere.
Here is peace and quietude. We can relax, rest and enjoy what
we see and feel — suit our feelings to the occasion; the mood
of nature becomes our mood.

Opposite this mood are appearances which suggest
vitality, movement or liveliness. The air may be clear, the

96
Dininution of Masses— 2s sain edo
Iterception of Line Interception and Verticals and Horizontals

Opposition of Line Supported by Other Lines

a a ems ll

Static Straight Line

—

g ALL Mines Toot
Oo par

GROUND,
(ay Diminution Lines
Spirit Level Lines

Lia pS WF)
Vertical L

Vanishing Points
on Three Planes

Sky Line Abrup Interest Added Perspective in Shadows

XI. — SIGNIFICANCE OF VARIOUS ITEMS IN COMPOSING

97
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

sunlight brilliant, and color values contrasting. Clouds may
be drifting and their shadows moving across the landscape.
Another example might be the surging sea with its movement
— the slow-moving main body of water, and the more swift
action of the breaking surf. The contrasts of color and
values may also lend to the vitality.

Movement and strong contrasts call for some physical
reaction. The first scene demands little adjustment of the
vision, while the changing aspects of the two latter views call
for much visual activity; the focal adjustment of the eye must
constantly alter to see the contrasts of extremes and move-
ments. Rhythmic feeling when observing nature is caused by
seeing both the moving and stationary parts. In creating the
proper state of mind to feel rhythm, vision and appreciation
must be employed.

Nature has visual rhythm in form, line, color and move-
ment. The semi-stationary quality of substance in foliage is
balanced by the more rigid limbs and the strong foundation
in the attachment of the trunk in the ground. This accents
the grace and movement felt in the texture of loose foliage
and small twigs as they respond to the varying strength of
the breezes.

The symmetry in the banks of streams and slow or
swift-moving water gives an example of nature’s rhythm.
However, some movements of water may be too fast for
artistic purposes. Speed may be indicated up to a certain
point in pictorial work. Beyond this, we can only resort to
tricks which are likely to hinder artistic value. The swiftness
of cascades or waterfalls is too great to be suggested with
pigment. Besides, these are dangerously sentimental subjects
to tackle.

Whether the movement of clouds is seen or felt, there is
always a certain rhythmic quality in them. Though there is
less stability in airy cloud form than in any other outdoor
items, here is a fine example of the need for balancing of
moving impermanent masses by the more stationary
elements. Some of the more stationary ground parts are

98
Interest on
Circular Lines

ZANTE
TANG

Apt?

Tall Trees — Trees Featured
High Hill

~ s. Jj
icgpereed ine
yp cies §

Travel of the Glance

XII. — VARIOUS ITEMS IN COMPOSING

99
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

essential. One would hardly paint cloud pictures with no part
of the landscape included.

Rhythm symbolizes harmony, activity, energy or move-
ment, yet it calls for a kind of solid footing as a balance —
like the fly-wheel of the steam engine — to hold movement
to proper speed. In art it needs some attachment to the more
stabilizing elements to create an artistic visual unity.

While rhythm is far-reaching and involves many influ-
ences apart from the mechanics of painting, the immediate
problem is to arrange the visual factors so the attention will
be within the confines of the canvas, which, in this instance,
is the source of rhythmic feeling.

Rhythm may be said to be the lubricating element in
pictorial composition. A sort of easy co-ordination of time
and circumstances is needed to relax the mind in order to
sense nobility and visual quality in nature and relate this in
the visual parts on the canvas. The artist must first respond
to impulses and appreciation before he can successfully
convey the feeling of rhythm. As the dancer uses rhythm to
integrate time, space and movement, so too, does the painter
utilize this element to integrate the factors in art.

Rhythm being an attribute of music, is felt in the
recurrence of similar sounds, contrasts and subtle nuances of
near tones. Poetry, too, must have rhythm. In languages, also,
this quality may be felt; for instance, Spanish has beautiful
undulation and repetition — a continuity of certain near
evenness, broken or interspersed with the contrasts of
climaxes and anti-climaxes.

Beyond all this there is an elemental need for rhythmic
influences. At the basis of all art are primitive, emotional
instincts which include a natural inclination for rhythm.
Regardless of what heights we attain in culture or creative
work, all attributes in these can be felt only through some
instinct that is inherent in all from the time of Adam. To suc-
ceed, then, we must not look for new powers, only cultivate
or expand those which are given us. Any new ideas or idio-
syncracies about art that are acquired are useless unless they
appeal to primitive emotional impulses.

100
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

Harold Speed, in his excellent book on drawing, says in
as many words that in the works of primitive man may be
seen a direct emotional feeling for rhythm, and that art
receives its highest excellence when primitive instincts
agreeably balance naturalism with conventionalism. History
bears this out. In a modern materialistic age, conventions,
literalism or realism sometimes over-influences the finer
quality coming from inherent naturalness. Realism,
conventions and scientific laws have their place in the study
of art, yet any ideas that are based on them must embrace
principles which integrate easily with primitive naturalness.
This equalization creates ideal or standard for guidance in
artistic work.

Naturalness and ease in depiction should always
transcend any over-influence of conventions. The abstraction
of the mind from over-influence of any acquired knowledge
should be almost complete. Some consideration for a near
approach to this mental status is essential if the proper union
between the mental or emotional nearness to the hand is
made and the rhythmic quality is to be felt in the picture.
Skill in handling pigment is necessary to create the rhythmic
feeling. The movements of the hand in painting should be
graceful, confident and direct.

Painting is like handwriting — the grace and swing in
curves, ovals, and the general rhythm in the line of written
words is possible only when the hand easily and confidently
makes the strokes.

The significance of line has much to do with rhythm in
painting. The right angle conjunction of straight line has less
grace than when the connection is less abrupt. Lengthy
vertical and horizontal straight lines not opposed or
interrupted are always more or less static.

Curved lines contribute more to rhythmic feeling than
any other type of line. Yet curved line generally needs
opposition by at least a few straight lines.

A predominance of curved or slanting lines might have
a great degree of movement, yet there is such a thing as too

101
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

much. Some upright and lateral straight lines are usually
needed in such an instance to slow the too speedy glance.

The recurrence of contrasts, accents, extreme values or
color, the repetitions of closely-related values and color are
also some of the visual factors in the picture which cause
rhythmic feeling.

At times the edges of mass or lines within the mass may
coincide with lines in other areas beyond the intervening
spaces. This usually adds to the rhythmic quality. The
blending or softening of edges in some places also helps by
easily merging of one area with another. The transitory line,
or the imaginary pathway between objects or contrasts, is
another aid in creating the feeling of rhythm. This implied
route for the travel of the eye often leads from on near-
related part to another. The transitory line adds a fine
abstract quality to the more visual factors.

Visual rhythm lays no claim of origin in one single
factor but is closely related to all factual elements of art
as well as the more remote yet important abstract
influences.

REPETITION

Repetition, strictly speaking, means regularity of
parallel lines, similar proportions, or sameness in values
or color, yet in painting it demands variety in the recurrence
of each item. Unequal measures or quantities in all parts are
needed to create artistic unity.

When the eye is properly focused on one element or
measure, it craves something of the same nature as the next
landing place. Responding to a natural law of vision, the eye
first sees points of special interest, the largest dark or light
mass or the greatest area of pure or nearly pure color. The
eye then travels to the next in importance, a dark or light, the
nearest value or proportion of mass, or the closest color.
(Plate XII). Not that it is relevant, but the eye also first sees
the fastest motion.

102
TY Ee)

OO SOR

Cirele or h«

1

03

XII. — IMPROVISED PICTORIAL IDEAS

or Circle

NN

QO. with S

NS

an
Myr’

Influence

Group Mass

SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

If the size of areas are agreeably varied, and color of
values modified in the secondary, tertiary, or still other
places, repetition will be balanced by variety, whereas if
masses are similar in size, color and values, have too much
sameness and monotony, the opposite of artistic quality will
be the result.

Variety and contrasts are needed to balance evenness of
values, color, or other repetitions in order to resist a too-swift
flow of the glance. Variety and contrasts are, in turn, held in
harmony by repeated measures in various proportions; thus
repetition furnishes the links in the unification of extremes.

In composing, both extreme dark and light main areas
need to be repeated elsewhere, either in smaller proportion of
mass of the same value, or modified slightly.

If a pure or nearly pure color exists in a considerable
area, it calls for a smaller proportion or modification in
other places. These repetitions of color may be a matter of
vibration in “spottings” of color, or the color may be
thoroughly mixed into a gray. For instance, nearly all of the
canvas may be in medium or light gray values with one area
of pure or nearly pure color as the dominant attraction. Such
a plan offers a chance for excellent balance and
harmony. A large, medium or even small area of color on a
gray field will always attract and hold the attention.
However, this kind of arrangement needs repetition of color
as well as any other harmony. Although it may be scarcely
apparent, the gray field should have enough of the main
color to hold the picture together from the color standpoint.

Repetition of color has, perhaps, more leeway than
line, values, or proportion of mass. Apparently there is no
limitation to the repetition of one color in a given picture, as
it can be employed with less and less of the other colors until
the work can become purely a monochrome with variety only
in the proportion of mass and in values.

104
CHAPTER III
TYPES OF COMPOSITION

Compositional stems in pictures sever the same purpose
as armatures in sculpture.

Perhaps from a pencil sketch, or small model, the
sculptor conceives his main construction base — the arma-
ture. With iron pipe and wire he builds his central supporting
framework, indicating the proportions and direction of the
main lines or angles of the plan. To this foundation he adds
the principal masses, and finally the smaller planes or more
subtle modeling. Then, too, like the painter, the sculptor may
cover the foundation, but he cannot entirely conceal his
foundation form. True, the armature cannot be seen, but we
know it is there from the general arrangement. As a matter
of fact, in sculpture this stem is a concrete reality, while in
painting merely its principle is observed. The symbol in
pictorial composition is considered as an imaginary form
and is not drawn mechanically.

If any one, in the beginning of study, will set himself to
study the various compositional forms, then experiment and
practice with variations of them, he will find that his instinc-
tive taste is developed; and subjects will in time lend them-
selves easily to his feeling for unity, and soon he may be able
to forget all about them.

It must never be forgotten and let this be most strongly
emphasized — that the dominant aim of the student should
be to train and equip himself to the point where he can judge
unity and all of its contributing factors by “feeling.”

If he confines himself to the study that will develop this

105
TYPES OF COMPOSITION

faculty, rather than trying to create unity before he knows
how, he will realize that although this appears the longest
road it is really the shortest. The more thought and concen-
tration put into his preparation, the easier will be the
procedure and the finer the design.

The mechanical stems shown in the pages illustrate the
various basic forms which underlie picture construction.
They suggest the manner of approach to unification —
nothing more. All such symbols seek to hide their identity
lest they appear too obvious or encroach upon the all-
important factor of originality in concept. Here again enters
the activity occasioned by opposing forces, the weighing and
balancing between conventional form and the freedom of
natural impulses and imagination. Although the latter may
need guidance, they must not be unduly influenced or
restricted by attempting to make rigid rules out of flexible
principles. On the other hand, while a particular form of
arrangement needs disguising, it is seldom, if ever, that this
is entirely possible. Furthermore, it is a question whether
complete concealment is essential or intended. Some
evidence is bound to remain.

It is doubtful if anyone can create unity without consid-
ering some principle. It is equally doubtful if anyone can
completely obliterate all signs of such instruments.

Many painters emphatically decide against the idea of
typical forms or stems in composition, yet practically all of
them unconsciously use all of the conventional plans.

With all that may be said against typical compositional
forms, the fact remains that the approaches to pictorial unity
are limited. What is unlimited, however, is the variation in
these forms. The number of picture plans that may be
derived from the generally accepted types of arranging is
beyond comprehension.

When the principles or typical forms are considered,
they are excellent crutches for any student when he is
forming his ideas for creating unity. It is well, though, to
consider them as supports only — temporary expedients —

106
1

0

XIV. — SUGGESTIONS FOR DESIGN
7

) ay S \ = | WY im Un aa

Group Mass or Pattern

y wp) fy

QO. with Ss

—

® SS

Oor s
a
B)

Three Spot

Influence

TYPES OF COMPOSITION

to be used during the training period, or in emergencies when
instinctive judgment fails to function.

Each conception and every pictorial design originates
from a thought or an idea. Compositional plans, or the
typical stems, are what we borrow from tradition. How much
we vary these, or how much of our own thought we put into
translating the principle of each is dependent on how well we
can balance the influence of natural impulses and influence
of conventions.

If any view presents qualities that stimulate a desire
to express, a small pictorial idea is all we need for the
compositional plan. The greatest pictures are often built
upon the simplest suggestion. We may take a plan used by
others, seek a similar composition in nature and from these
two authorities build an entirely new and original picture.
This does not mean that we imitate nature or the other
painter, only translate both the plan and the view.

The small pen and ink sketches in the illustrations are
intended merely as ideas to be translated in variation. The
sketches of paintings by different artists are in no sense exact
reproductions — they are only broad ideas of the plans upon
which each painting is based.

It is a very good practice for every student to make a
collection of reproductions of paintings; hundreds can be
accumulated. A large variety of compositional plans is a
liberal education to anyone studying art. Seeing the pictorial
ideas of others gives confidence and encouragement, and
a respect for the profession of artist. Practical ideas on
composition and its forms are also to be found in many good
books on the market.

Henry R. Poore, in his excellent volume on composition,
illustrates seven main stems of arrangement and describes
their variation as well as different forms of unity in
reproduced paintings. Other authorities set forth diverse
pictorial plans. A general list of the principal forms or stems
of composition are described on the illustration plates as:
The Steelyard, The Balance Scale, The Circle or O, The S or

108
TYPES OF COMPOSITION

Compound Curve, The Pyramid or Triangle, The Cross, The
Radiating Line, The Ell or Rectangular, the Suspended
Steelyard, The Three Spot, The Group Mass, The Diagonal
Line, The Tunnel, The Silhouette, The Pattern. This listing is
at random and not necessarily by the importance of each
type. In studying composition we should not consider one
approach better than another but study and experiment with
each and every one. At the same time it is well to improvise
without considering any particular form of arrangement.

The illustration plates show the principles of composi-
tion in pictorial form. Where the type is not named, a
symbol from which each may be derived can be seen below
each sketch. This symbol or worded description is by no
means a strict definition of the type or types from which each
composition is built. Some of the arrangements may be
derived from or influenced by compositional stems not
indicated. Like translating principles in painting pictures,
each individual may translate differently when analyzing
completed compositions.

STEELYARD, PLATE XVII

The steelyard is probably the most popular and possibly
the simplest form of balance in general use. The illustrative
symbol consists of a bar resting on a bar or fulcrum, the
largest weight resting on the shortest end of the bar and
closest to the fulcrum, while the smallest weight rests on or
near the long end of the bar. The natural placement of a
point of interest would be on or near the theoretical fulcrum,
or near the main weight. In some cases the main weight or
mass, or group of masses, may be the chief attraction. Tn this
event there is usually some connecting link between this main
weight and the lesser one. This may be an actual line or edge,
or merely space. In the latter instance, the small items may be
placed to make a more definite indication of a
pathway for the eye.

The steelyard type of arrangement suggests the use of
main vertical and horizontal line with an opportunity to

109
TYPES OF COMPOSITION

utilize the curved or slanting lines to give variety, support
and interception.

The steelyard principle of weights is indicative of
near-related values. The lesser weight should be somewhat
the same value or color as the larger one in order to produce
repetition and to relate these unequal quantities. The two
main masses need not be placed on a balanced lateral level;
one may rest on ground more in the middle distance or
distance. Composition often needs third dimensional balance
as well as lateral balance.

The steelyard, like most of the other plans, has a wide
scope — infinite variation. It also may be combined with or
changed into another form — such as the circle or pyramid
— by placement of other objects or masses.

Having no actual rule to measure distance between the
two main weights, in this form of balance, once again we
have an unknown quantity determined only by instinct
within a variable interval of space. To produce the artistic
equivalent here, the artist can only depend on his intuitive
sense of artistic balance. Attempts have been made to set
down certain proportionate measures. These might work in
one or two instances, but habitually using the same formula
would defeat artistic purposes. The steelyard or its influence
can be seen in the works of Turner, Daubigny, East and
Thiebault on Plate IJ, also in the designs by Thomas, Millet,
Manet, Monet, Rousseau, East and Corot on Plate IV.
On Plate VI the arrangement by Borg suggests the steelyard
as do the pictures by William Wendt and Ben Foster on
Plate III.

THE BALANCE SCALE, PLATE XVII

The balance scale is not particularly adapted to outdoor
painting. However, it may sometimes be used in mountain
pictures where the main peak is placed near the top center,
with trees or other objects in the two lower corners.
Sometimes, too, in a purely decorative style where formality

110
Group Mass or &

Group Mass

Radiating Line or A

orks

ss

Greup Ma

roup Mass

G

GEMENTS

N

X¥. — BOAT ARRA

111
OU ORES. > >
Ui 2 LZ NS

SMe

lage!

XVI. — COMPOSITIONS OF SEA AND SEACOAST

112

TYPES OF COMPOSITION

is needed the balance scale principle may be invoked also.
This type of composition lends itself admirably to wall dec-
oration or mural work where formal balance corresponds to
the equal measures of architecture.

CIRCLE, PLATE XVII

Next to the steelyard in practicability and popularity is
the O or circle approach to arrangement. It generally offers a
pretty sure method of achieving unity, provided the main
opening or space is kept dominant. It may be described as a
roughly indicated rounded, rectangular or irregular opening.
The sides of this opening may be formed by line, mass or
edge. The circle idea may be shown in perspective by an
oblong space or by an oval. In fact, the circular is any
arrangement where the eye will travel around a considerable
area in the central portion of the canvas. Usually the chief
attraction is the main opening or some certain spot within it.
In the latter instance it should not be in the exact center, but
near the boundaries of the opening, or crossing on to or
wholly on the main pathway of the circular observation.
(Plate XII.) The circular type can be derived from the steel-
yard pyramid or the three spot; it is naturally much the same
as the tunnel.

Easily discerned circular forms can be seen in the
pictures of Turner, Rousseau and Constable on Plate II. Here
also may be observed the circle influence in the work of
Harpignies and Vicat Cole. George Elmer Browne’s arrange-
ment on Plate V is decidedly build on the circle idea, while
Bellows on the same plate is only slightly influenced, as is the
picture by Chauncey Ryder. The composition by Nichols,
Garber, Carlson, Metcalf and Rungius on Plate VI also show
the influence of a circular observation.

In Brangwyn’s windmill composition on Plate IV may
be seen a somewhat unusual example of the circular idea.
Here, too, is an interesting solution of line opposition.

The circle plan often assumes a kind of U influence.

113
TYPES OF COMPOSITION

In fact, this formation is seen so much in nature it might be
considered a distinct type of composition. The lateral
ground planes nearly always exist in outdoor pictures, and
when rather large vertical plans are seen on either side, the
U idea is suggested. The picture by George Elmer Browne,
Plate V, Constable, Plate IJ, and Wendt on Plate III, each
show this U influence.

S$ OR COMPOUND CURVE, PLATE XVII

The S or compound curve is virtually in a field of its
own. Generally it is suggested more by line or edge than
mass. This type is usually applicable in picturing rivers,
arroyos, or roads viewed from high station point. However
it is useful whenever the main line or main group of lines
suggests compound curves. The dominant curves and
slanting lines in this type generally suggest grace and move-
ment and an easy relation of the parts.

If a special point of interest exists, it should be near the
converging end of the main lines, or well placed on the latter.
The S form is closely related to the radiating or converging
line type of composition. Perhaps of all the forms of
arrangement, the S or compound curve idea more easily
resolves itself to rhythmic qualities. With variety in the
curves and some interception from straight verticals and
horizontals, this plan offers an opportunity to secure
harmonious design, especially those of linear influence.

Both strong and light influences of the S type are shown
in the arrangements of King, Nichols, Peters and Lawless on
Plate IJ; Symons, Bellows, Jack Smith, Putnuff, and
Hibbard on Plate VI.

PYRAMID, PLATE VIII

The pyramid or triangle suggests stability or perma-
nence because of its structure. It may be describe by line,
mass or spottings. The pyramidal form may be placed toward
either side of the canvas. If the form is large, it may be

114
TYPES OF COMPOSITION

merged into group mass or silhouette type, or it may be
transformed into the steelyard by placing it to one side and
adding counterbalances of smaller items; or, objects may be
placed along its main lines, creating a circular observation.
If a true pyramid is placed near the center of the canvas and
the forms are rather close-knit or solid, it is likely to have
too much stability. Therefore the plan should only roughly
indicate a triangular pathway for the eye, rather than a solid
mass from which one would have to seek a pathway to
distance on one side or the other. The triangle easily
combines with the grouped mass or circle types. The
triangular influence may be seen in the design by Rousseau,
Van Marcke and Cazin on Plate IV, Dougherty on Plate III
and Lauritz on Plate V.

THE CROSS, PLATE XVIII

The cross is not particularly useful in outdoor work.
However, it may be sometimes used in architectural motives,
boats or leafless trees. The chief consideration is that a small
point of interest needs to be placed near the intersection of
the main lines; the cross is somewhat like the converging line.

THE RADIATING LINE, PLATE XVIII

The radiating or converging line organization generally
presents a direct simple method, calling the attention to the
main area of interest, or what Henry R. Poore calls the
principality. The normal place for the main point of interest
in this plan of composition is at or near the converging point
of the main lines. Some views have roads, fences, streams, the
edges of clouds or the horizon that leads the glance to the
apex of their lines. Linear perspective of buildings sometimes
may form this type of planning. The tunnel and circle forms
may embody radiating lines that lead through their main
openings. However, if converging lines are strong or well-
defined in the view, they may, in the picture, need some stiff
interference such as secondary interest, opposition or

115
TYPES OF COMPOSITION

concealment. The glance must not travel to speedily, which it
will if the general plan appears to be forced by an obvious
spoke-like design. All lines should be irregular, broken or
intercepted.

The influence of radiating line is evident in the designs
of Peters and Folinsbee on Plate III, and Schofield on Plate
V. Jourdan, Richmond and Thiebault on Plate IT also show
some indication of converging line.

ELL OR RECTANGULAR, PLATE XVIII

Although the ell or rectangular is somewhat similar to
the steelyard, some artists consider it a separate form, yet
only in rare instances it is possible to balance one large
upright main mass with merely a lateral plane. The ell can
easily combine with the steelyard or radiating line.
Sometimes a special small interest, such as a figure, may
balance a large weight; or again, variety interest in the
ground planes, distance or sky spaces may balance the main
upright mass in the ell type of arrangement.

SUSPENDED STEELYARD, PLATE XIX

Although it may be obscure or seem far-fetched, the sus-
pended steelyard may aid unification, especially where the
subjects are located on a high horizon and the foreground is
simple. In many respects it is analogous to the steelyard and
the same principles of unequal measures may be employed.
The fulcrum is the suspension point. The natural place for
the main interest is near this point.

In the upper righthand corner of Plate XIV is an impro-
vised sketch with the suspended steelyard idea combined
with the circular motive.

THREE SPOT, PLATE XIX

The three spot idea may be used as a separate form of
composition or the mass placement may indicate some other

116
Steelyard

Balanced Scales

O or Circular

or Compound Gurve-

S$.

MS OF COMPOSITION — A

XVII. — FOR

117
Fyramid or Triangle

Radiating Line

Cross

Radiating Line

Ell or Rectangular

XVII. — FORMS OF COMPOSITION — B

18

1
Suspended Steelyard

Liles —- tag

Three Spot

Scattered Masses Arranged

XIX. — FORMS OF COMPOSITION — C

119
120

XX. — FORMS OF COMPOSITION — D

Pattern

Silhouette

ie

Tunnel

i.

SANE

rill:

ih}

Ne

Diagonal Line

TYPES OF COMPOSITION

form of arrangement, such as the steelyard or pyramid. The
principle of the three spot originates more from a natural law
of vision, rather than mechanical picture construction stem.
Two objects or masses, even though they are unequally
placed upon the picture areas, will not create unity, but place
a third mass and the observation becomes better.

In outdoor pictures, the figurative foundation is the flat
ground in the near part of the picture. In many cases, the two
main masses may be in the foreground and the third higher
up. This naturally suggests the circle, the pyramid or the
triangle principle. However, the three spot idea does not
demand such placement. The main spots may be placed
anywhere on the surface and the lesser ones indicated where
they will best balance. All this does not mean to say that
there shall not be more than three spots or masses. Three is
the minimum; the painter may use as many as he needs for
balance or unification.

In addition to the three spot being a form of arrange-
ment nearly all pictures have three small points of attraction.
These may include the chief interest or they may not. If they
do not include the main interest, they are usually more the
result of accident than intention, yet they will be there. These
may be small or large bits of pure color or value contrasts, an
edge, or any other items. One needs only to glance with the
eyes squinted at any picture, and these will appear.

Of course, in deliberately using the three spot idea as a
form of composition, the eye will naturally gravitate first to
the three largest masses. These form the chief stem of the
arrangement. When the three main “spottings” of values are
once placed so that good balance is achieved, the lesser
values and contrasts should merely strengthen or maintain
this balance in its larger sense.

The principle of three spots applies to large strong
contrasts as well as to large value areas. One large contrast
such as in the silhouette type of composition should be
balanced by at least two others. However though contrasts
are effective and generally necessary in composing, they are

121
TYPES OF COMPOSITION

more of an accessory to value areas rather than being main
items in the compositional plan.

The three spot principle is brought out quite strongly
in Manet’s boat scene and Monet’s haystacks on Plate IV.
Its slight influence can be seen in Brangwyn’s windmill on
Plate IV, Jourdan’s picture on Plate JJ, and Grigwire’s
design on Plate VI also shows consideration for the three
spot principle.

GROUPED MASS, PLATE XIX

Unity may be achieved by placing several masses into a
larger group. However, this usually requires that the main
group be of considerable size and contain a variety of form,
values and color within its boundaries. Usually it demands,
also, that the main contours suggest stability. This naturally
suggests a leaning towards the pyramid or silhouette. Being
an isolation problem, the main mass is usually situated on
one or two fields of medium light values which, of course,
may contain some variation in line, color or values, though
these are not of sufficient strength to interfere with the
main group.

The principle of group mass is the chief compositional
form used in painting still life. The practice, of painting still
life, is incidentally, of the greatest advantage to the painter
of either outdoor or indoor subjects. It is particularly fine
discipline for those who paint the landscape or growing
things outdoors. The grouping of trees and other growths
into compact areas with consistent variety is a pretty sure
method of producing simplicity in the design.

The group mass idea is generally quite a safe plan to
achieve unity. Its compactness calls immediate attention to
the work. Good examples are to be seen in the pictures by
Parrish, Nichols, C. L. A. Smith, Dougherty and Wendt on
Plate III. Also Albert Ryder, Waugh, Vincent, Keith and
Lauritz on Plate V.

Sometimes the group mass plan can be effective when

122
TYPES OF COMPOSITION

more of an accessory to value areas rather than being main
items in the compositional plan.

The three spot principle is brought out quite strongly
in Manet’s boat scene and Monet’s haystacks on Plate IV.
Its slight influence can be seen in Brangwyn’s windmill on
Plate IV, Jourdan’s picture on Plate II, and Grigwire’s
design on Plate VI also shows consideration for the three
spot principle.

GROUPED MASS, PLATE XIX

Unity may be achieved by placing several masses into a
larger group. However, this usually requires that the main
group be of considerable size and contain a variety of form,
values and color within its boundaries. Usually it demands,
also, that the main contours suggest stability. This naturally
suggests a leaning towards the pyramid or silhouette. Being
an isolation problem, the main mass is usually situated on
one or two fields of medium light values which, of course,
may contain some variation in line, color or values, though
these are not of sufficient strength to interfere with the
main group.

The principle of group mass is the chief compositional
form used in painting still life. The practice, of painting still
life, is incidentally, of the greatest advantage to the painter
of either outdoor or indoor subjects. It is particularly fine
discipline for those who paint the landscape or growing
things outdoors. The grouping of trees and other growths
into compact areas with consistent variety is a pretty sure
method of producing simplicity in the design.

The group mass idea is generally quite a safe plan to
achieve unity. Its compactness calls immediate attention to
the work. Good examples are to be seen in the pictures by
Parrish, Nichols, C. L. A. Smith, Dougherty and Wendt on
Plate [JI. Also Albert Ryder, Waugh, Vincent, Keith and
Lauritz on Plate V.

Sometimes the group mass plan can be effective when

122
TYPES OF COMPOSITION

combined with several of the other types, the pattern and
silhouette particularly. This combination can be seen in the
works of Keith, Waugh, Albert Ryder, Vincent and Borg on
Plate V, also in the designs by Hanson and Thieme on Plate
VI and Parrish and Wendt on Plate III.

DIAGONAL LINE, PLATE XX

Some writers on composition include the diagonal line
base. In general substance it is described as a main line or
series of lines running from near the upper lefthand corner
to the lower right, although there need be no reason why the
line should not extend from the upper right to the lower left,
unless it be for the unaccountable fact that the first method
is the natural inclination. With a considerable slant in the
main line, the next move is to oppose or intercept these by
other lines or masses. The diagonal line may be handled in a
manner similar to the steelyard principle — that is, two
objects may intercept near the upper and lower terminals.
Either small or large forms may be placed at the discretion of
the painter.

Owing to the eye-carrying power of strong diagonal
lines, strength is needed in verticals or opposing slanted lines;
the latter may often call for almost right angle conjunctions
(these are the stiffest opposition). The area below the main
diagonal lines is usually suggestive of strong mass values and
solidity. This necessitates some secondary interest in the
lighter area above the line, which, in the average view, could
be in the sky. However, this scheme may be reversed with the
upper areas in dark or heavy masses, while the lower areas
are in light. For instance the main lower area might represent
a slope covered with sand or snow in extremely light values
and the upper parts dark thick pines or other trees.

The diagonal line motive in Courbet’s work on Plate IV
stands out quite strongly. Its influence is apparent also in the
pictures by Symons on Plate V; Folinsbee on Plate JII.

123
TYPES OF COMPOSITION
THE TUNNEL, PLATE XX

Although similar to the circle, some authorities
consider the tunnel or tunnel-like form separately since it
usually depends on perspective lines or planes rather than a
one main circular observation.

In substance, this plan suggests a view through a tunnel-
like series of arches, squares or irregular construction,
surrounding three or four sides with the exit or main interest
in an opening beyond the diminishing framework.

Europe, with its quaint old structures, narrow streets
and bridges, offers suggestions for this plan of arrangement,
although geographic location need have little to do with
any type or form. We have in America ample opportunity
to use this form in doorways, archways and _ thickly-
wooded areas.

Pathways through forests are often seen with the trunks
of trees dwindling in size as they recede; overhanging
branches and foliage form archways through which may be
seen the opening beyond. The path and foliage may often be
sprinkled with sunlight and shadows, lending variety and
secondary interest to a possible interest through the main
opening beyond.

The tunnel appealed to Whistler and Brangwyn. They
created many fine designs built upon this principle, as have
many other artists. The tunnel-like principle can be seen in
the design by Hans Heysen on Plate IV, also in
the composition of Rousseau on Plate IJ. Some slight indica-
tion of the tunnel idea can be seen in Ben Foster’s picture on
Plate III.

THE SILHOUETTE, PLATE XX

The silhouette is one of the rare types of composition —
that is, insofar as outdoor painting is concerned. It is much
the same as grouped mass; in fact, it should nearly always
embody variation of shade and form in the main areas. The

124
TYPES OF COMPOSITION

chief principle of the silhouette is subordinating interest
and contrast inside the grouped mass to interest in contours.
This interest in contrasting edges or contours is generally
heightened by interchange of values. Interchange adds
strength and charm to any composition especially the
silhouette. Extremely dark values extending onto extremely
light areas is one of the main supports in the silhouette type
of arrangement.

While large grouped masses are needed in the silhouette
approach, the contrasting edges claim dominance. This
dominance is aided in many cases by the principle of
graduated values from the middle shades to their extreme
intensity near the contact of the edge of a value of opposite
intensity.

Again, isolated masses of extreme dark or light may
be placed on field of their opposites, or on areas of the half-
tone or intermediate shades. These isolated masses, whether
grouped or single, should have their values simplified
or brought close together in order to preserve a strong
silhouette.

Any arrangement depending on the silhouette demands
that particular stress be placed on drawing, especially in the
contrasting edges of contours, as errors stand out strongly
and may spoil an otherwise good arrangement.

The silhouette plan is well adapted to a decorative style
in painting where contours are more stressed than modeling
or recession. It also presents fine opportunity for creating
rhythm through line or edges.

The silhouette types of composition generally embody
the idea of interchange. For instance, in the work of Manet,
Rousseau and Cazin on Plate IV, Hanson and Thieme on
Plate VI, show the influence of this principle. It can be seen
also in the picture of Jourdan on Plate II, as well as in the
pictures by Albert Ryder, Vincent and Browne on Plate V.
The silhouette form may merge into still another plan which,
for want of a better name, may be called the pattern.

125
TYPES OF COMPOSITION
THE PATTERN, PLATE XX

The pattern, being more of an abstract principle than
the other types, is possibly the most ideal. Since it calls for no
geometric stem, it must depend entirely on the feeling for
unity. While it is the most ideal, it is at the same time the
most difficult, the reason being it has no special form. Its
dependence is mainly on imagination or ingenuity or an
instinctive feeling for harmony when it appears in nature.
This is a good type for experimentation, as it tests the faculty
of feeling for unification and at the same time discourages
too much reliance on the more conventional forms. Pattern
design offers also opportunities for practice with purely
imaginative notes and plans. Allover patterns may be
arranged with or without a special spot for interest.

By ingenuity and this plan, the artist may cover an entire
canvas with a finely woven design and still have dimensional
effects and unity. After all composition or a unified design is
the goal regardless of the approach. The more the painter
can feel and appreciate the quality coming from a pleasing
unification, the less he needs to consider any particular type
or form. However, in order to develop this faculty, he needs
to study and experiment with all forms of arrangement and
not become too methodical in organizing his designs.

The pattern idea may be seen in the works of Harpignes
on Plate II, Kenyon Cox, C. L. A. Smith and Parrish on Plate
IJ, Van Marcke and Brangwyn on Plate IV, Jack W. Smith,
Vincent, Schofield, Puthuff, Waugh, Bellows and Keith on
Plate V. The influence of the pattern can be seen in the
designs of Johnson, Nichols and Ritschel on Plate VI.

Throughout the illustrations will be found ideas upon
which American and European artists have built their
pictures. Other ideas may be seen in the improvised sketches.
Many of the plans in each group are derived mainly from one
of the types just described, while in other plans the influence

126
TYPES OF COMPOSITION

of several forms may be seen. In still other instances scarcely
any evidence of a foundation stem is evident.

Compositional plans, like all other factors or principles
in art, are so flexible and interlocking it is difficult in some
cases and impossible in others to segregate each in a distinct
classification. For instance, the pyramid might be similar to
the group mass, the three spot, or very near the steelyard.
The radiating line might be much the same as the S or circle,
group mass or steelyard, ell or cross. Again, the circle could
embody the tunnel, steelyard, S, pyramid, or others. The
pattern is quite elastic; it may stand alone or be related to any
of the types or it might disregard all of them. Since it
depends almost entirely on a feeling for balance, the pattern
idea is rather a haven of refuge when we cannot decide on a
particular typical plan for arrangement.

The first and last thing to consider is the instinctive
feeling for balance. The more this can be exercised, the more
pleasing will be the harmony.

The various symbols or the types of composition are
perhaps the only practical means of developing the sense of
instinctive feeling for unity. These typical stems are designed
for this purpose and no other. Therefore, the suggestion to
the student is to study, analyze and experiment with all of the
foundation stems until his faculties are fully developed, and
then forget them as much as possible.

Compositional stems are not a measure or standard
to judge procedure or the finished picture. Typical stems
have their place and importance in selection, rejection and
composing but in the final analysis instinctive taste and
judgment is the sole authority. When we intuitively feel
unity, artistic quality results, but when we consciously
depend on a compositional form, or attempt to feature a typ-
ical stem, the arrangement loses at least some quality.
Compositional stems are merely the means of developing
instinctive taste and appreciation.

The enjoyment or appreciation of fine composition is
the first artistic requirement. When we can truly appreciate

127
TYPES OF COMPOSITION

harmonious arrangement we can better understand the
means that produced it. The appreciation of quality or
beauty in nature and art is always an inherent instinct though
development of esthetic judgment is often necessary.

Compositional stems should be considered as a means
to an end rather than an objective in themselves. Therefore,
compositional stems should be valued only for their place
and limitations — then utilized with a happy anticipation of
their worth and possibilities.

128
CHAPTER IV
CONCLUSION

A main objective in the art of painting is to disguise,
insofar as possible, the use of methods or the influence
of principles.

This concealment creates, so to speak, a great mystery
— an attractiveness, unseen and indescribable. This abstract
quality is the element that places pictorial work in the realm
of fine art. The purpose here is not to attempt to define this
quality or to infer that it can be directly sought or created.
The object is rather to describe the factors or principles and
influences from which artistic quality arises.

In recent times some trends in art almost entirely
disregard principles. Yet only time will tell whether this is a
wise procedure or not. This much may be said, however,
without principles it is doubtful if any real worthwhile
instruction can be given or any skill or appreciation
developed. The foundation for study and practice of any
worthy creative work can only be built upon principles; there
is nothing else that will take their place.

True art of the past has been built by the guidance of
these essentials. The worthwhile art of the future will
undoubtedly be produced in the same manner.

Underlying all fine art are sound principles. The basis of
all principles are sound ideas. The main ideas or major
principles of art cannot be reiterated too often.

In order that the principles of each basic idea will
crystallize in the mind every fundamental of art should be set
forth frequently.

129
CONCLUSION

Throughout this treatise several ideas have been
repeated perhaps many times. It is well to remember that
only by repeated statements can ideas be grasped and
retained. In study and practice, we must not only have
new ideas but continually refer to existing main ideas or
principles. Many times each day during the painter’s career,
he will either consciously or subconsciously be reminded
of principles.

The fact that each painter may have his individual
translation of a principle does not lessen its value. Often
diverging viewpoints may stimulate entirely new ideas, or aid
in fortifying each artist’s personal convictions.

As a matter of fact, opposite beliefs is one of the main
influences in creating originality. Each artist has his own
convictions and should always be prepared to defend
them. Building up a personal viewpoint is one of the first
things to do in the study and practice of art. Sooner or later
every student must be decided in his views, at least to a
reasonable extent. Everyone needs to be decisive enough to
have independent judgment in forming concepts and
building compositions.

While a student may alter his ideas, or even his style in
painting, he still must have courage in his convictions. He
cannot change to suit every idea that comes along.

The quality achieved in any work must, in the last
analysis, depend on the ideas and efforts of the student
himself and the goal he has set. He is master of his own
destiny as far as accomplishment in art is concerned.

Learning the art of painting is not an easy task. It
takes a great deal of intelligence, keen analysis, study and
practice. Even with this, there is never a full understanding
of all factors or elements, nor is practice ever entirely
satisfactory.

Since the approach to art is through a roundabout path,
no doubt its first study is always confusing. To make the
matter more difficult, the beginner generally cherishes
praise from friends, who, as a rule, know nothing whatever

130
CONCLUSION

of art or its requirements. Early attempts at picturization
usually develop a certain ego or pride, which is hard to set
aside when the student is confronted with the study of real
artistic essentials.

Changing the viewpoint under such circumstances
is one of the most difficult of problems for both the
student and his advisors. Ironically enough, the beginner
can never see or realize the most important thing he
should remember, that is, a simple, naive manner of
approach to both study and picturization must always be
fostered. He generally wants to put this aside and use what
he learns to paint pictures.

Here begins an equally difficult problem, that of
developing and expanding this naturalness into artistic
expression. The matter of getting the beginner to use
suggestions for training and disciplining himself rather
than using them as rules for building pictures is one of the
problems that is yet unsolved.

Some who study art are not interested in adding to
the institution of art in a large sense; they merely study
and practice in a semi-amateurish way for their own
personal enjoyment. This type of student presents the
greatest difficulty. He usually wants to be shown how to
paint a picture. Therefore, the only thing to be done is
to aid by making suggestions about arranging specific
compositions.

Curiously enough, in contradiction to the above
statements, many take up art late in life merely as a hobby,
and do very credible work. Business men in various parts of
the country have formed clubs for the study and practice of
art; and the quality which the members often produce is
surprisingly good.

The study and practice of art is much like the study and
practice of anything else. Any subject should be reduced to
its simplest elements first, then the lesser contributing factors
should be studied and analyzed. Like gathering the materials
to build a house, the factors in art are gathered from many

131
CONCLUSION

sources. Yet it should be understood that while influences
and principles in art are derived from different sources they
are brought together for one purpose only: to form an
artistic unity in the finished picture.

Putting the matter of study and training briefly, talent
or natural ability must first exist. All information,
suggestions and other forms of instruction are intended to
preserve naturalness in expression and at the same time
create a quality that will fulfill all requirements of esthetic
enjoyment.

The first objective in study is to develop or expand the
individual’s native ability; the next is the enjoyment in
depiction, and finally, the ultimate purpose of art is for the
benefit of humanity in general. Before this altruistic purpose
can be fulfilled, however, pictures must have visual as
well as the finer abstract qualities which fully exercise the
esthetic pleasures.

The artist must be really qualified. He must enjoy
nature, art and be in tune with beauty, nature and life. He
needs to feel rhythmic influences and respond to emotional
impulses. This does not signify weakness but, rather,
strength. The artist’s strength, outside of talent, are in
imagination and emotions. Weakness lies in the inability to
respond to these and the anticipation of reward.

The natural instincts or imagination needs to be guided
by reason, at least to some extent. Reason is also supposed to
be an inherent faculty. Whatever may be said against logic or
common sense in the theory of art or in the training of
natural ability, the fact remains that no artistic quality can
come into being without some degree of sound judgment.
Using reason to guide the natural impulses develops the
artist’s taste, judgment and his instinctive feeling for quality.
These powers, skill with paint and the artist’s enjoyment in
depiction are the things that decide the value of his work to
the advancement of art generally.

The worth of any picture is exactly the worth of the
artist’s ability to develop his instinctive judgment, to respond
CONCLUSION

to his natural impulses and to use some measure of
intelligence in the process.

Between the forces of impulses and reason each painter
must develop an individual viewpoint and assert his
independence. Before he can create artistic quality which
ultimately benefits humanity in general, he must first set
himself apart, so to speak, and become independent in
thought and action. He must detach himself from all
influence of his fellow beings so that he may fully enjoy
his depiction in order that his fellow beings, whom he
has set aside, may ultimately enjoy the result of his
artistic experience.

The pleasure of picturizing and appreciation go hand in
hand in the development of art. Both contribute their share
of influences. Artistic expression would be of little value
were it not for responsive appreciation. Between these
influences art fulfills all of its purposes.

Striking a balance between influences is the main
abstract factor in artistic procedure. The fact that there
is no way of measuring any of the quantities or influences
is the reason art is such a difficult subject to write about
or teach. This is also one reason, perhaps the main one,
why art has always been and perhaps always will be, a subject
of controversy.

The fact that fine art is dependent on many ideas,
different mannerisms and in untold instances of instinctive
judgment in gauging visual as well as abstract measures, all
make it a subject of many seeming and actual contradictions.

In both theory and practice of art, one factor is apt
to interlope on the field of another and either partially or
wholly destroy the latter’s importance. Perhaps in the next
instance there is a reversal and the last factor overly
influences the first factor.

The balancing of influences or judging between forces
is a problem for the beginner, the advanced student and
the experienced painter. Every beginner should remember
that he, as well as those who are more competent, has

133
CONCLUSION

much the same problems and that only experience can
make a solution just a little easier. Moreover, solving any
problem does not depend on how much the individual knows
or how much he practices. But it does depend on his
ability to instinctively feel the measures or judge the
quantity between factors or influences that have direct
bearing on each particular condition, circumstance or
picturization.

The study of art does not consist in accumulating a lot
of facts merely for the purpose of carrying around a mental
encyclopedia. The purpose of reason or knowledge is to
guide imagination and invention in reducing ideal mental
concepts into pictorial realities. “Theory is the guide,
practice the ratification and life of theory.” Appreciation,
imagination, natural impulses and reason combine to form
theories or concepts. These, even with the element of logic,
are not always practical. Then again some degree of reason
must come to guide the hand in producing a practical visual
reality. Logic is needed in studying the theory and purpose of
art; in forming concepts of pictorial plans and in building
the actual picture.

Abstract quality comes from nobility in thought,
intuitive judgment plus good craftsmanship or skill in
building the picture. Such analysis is sound reasoning.
Beauty in both the abstract concept and concrete visual
structure is essential. The ideology must be complete.
Unworthy ideas or gross errors in painting are always
disturbing and unforgivable.

Discord in any composition, assuming all faculties
competent, can only originate from two main causes:
misjudgment in the concept or mistakes in applying drawing
mediums or pigment. However, there might be other
underlying causes. On occasions, for instance, when the mind
or body are not in condition to depict. The painter may be
unwell or tired. Again, over-concentration might cause the
judgment to be poor or at times things do not look right
for no apparent reason. In all such cases one thing only can

134
CONCLUSION

be done and that is the artist should occupy himself with
something far removed from painting for a while.

Good work is only possible when circumstances allow
all faculties to function properly. Therefore, those overly
ambitious souls should take heed and realize that art can not
be forced, but comes naturally and easily only when the right
conditions exist. Enjoyment in painting should never be
overwhelmed by ambition. The latter has its worth but not at
the expense of the former. Ambition should be directed more
toward developing the artistic faculties than toward the pro-
duction of pictures. It is not the size or number of paintings
but the degree of ability that counts.

The appreciation of paintings is a source of real help to
any student, not so much from analysis but from an incentive
standpoint. However, appreciation should not extend to the
point of overwhelming admiration or downright worship.
The student should not lose his identity and seek to imitate.

The pleasure derived from viewing the achievements of
others, coupled with a true appreciation of nature, sharpens
the desire to express pictorially. Each sketch or picture stud-
ied or painted adds more and more to enjoyment, confidence
and satisfaction. There is no greater pleasure than that
derived from creative work, although before this can be full
and complete, much study, analysis, research and work are
in order.

Besides appreciation and the development of talent the
student needs to respect natural laws, truths, principles, tra-
dition and precedent. He must also have perseverance, deter-
mination to achieve, and enthusiasm in study and depiction.
The beginner should learn to instinctively judge between all
influences; to use good taste in selection; the importance of
simplicity in composition; good drawing as well as approxi-
mately related values, harmony and balance in color and
recessional effects. While there may be many ideas as to the
definition of these visual qualities, the definitions are not
unlimited. Art is capable of expressing infinite ideas through
an infinite variation of mannerisms, yet visual quality is

135
CONCLUSION

somewhat more restricted in definition. Visual quality in
artistic work can always be described or defined without
restricting definition to a narrow scope.

The fundamental principles of art and the words and
terms which describe these essentials form the alphabet of
the artistic language. While many ideas may be interpreted
through art and many translations made of tis principles,
there is understanding enough to allow for the development
of originality within the flexibility or principles and their
definition.

Seeking information to develop his natural abilities is
the first duty of the student. At the same time this is the first
and possibly the greatest problem. With all of the various
opinions on art and the many contradicting statements, it is
very likely that he will be very much confused before he has
formed any general ideas of what it is all about.

Of greatest importance to any student, when he has
gleaned his information from every conceivable source, is to
calmly sit down and meditate on the problems of art and its
many angles, then form his own ideas, In all of the various
opinions expressed on art at least some material should have
agreement enough to form a basis from which to make a
beginning.

The student has ample opportunity for the study of var-
ious ways in which other artists have handled the problem of
painting. In the large list of paintings and reproductions to
be seen and the many books to be read he always has the
authority for any main idea or principle he might consider.
He may employ the same principles used by others, yet, if he
fosters an individual viewpoint, originality will prevail. He
will in time create equally meritorious work, provided he has
studied and practiced as others have done.

Let it be said once more that individuality in thought,
respect for nature, established truths and principles is one
road that can lead to true original artistic expression. There
may be other means but they have not been found and it is
doubtful if they ever will.

136
CONCLUSION

Unity is possible in pictorial composition only through
the observance of the principles that create it. Therefore,
knowledge of fundamentals is the important matter to be
considered. We cannot have too much knowledge of artistic
essentials. Principles are always the basis of study and prac-
tice. These fundamentals are lasting, greater and more
constructive than personal ideas or opinions. Unless
personal ideas are in conformity with basic principles we had
best ignore them.

Most of the problems in painting can be solved and
originality achieved when we have a broad knowledge and
respect for the purpose and importance of principles. A
familiarity with artistic essentials does not lessen their value
or evoke disrespect for these factors. As a matter of fact, art
and its principles is one of the very few subjects that will
stand an unlimited amount of familiarity without producing
an aversion to the subject in question.

The more we know of art and its factors, the greater our
respect and admiration.

Whenever we see a fine painting we thoroughly appre-
ciate the accomplishment of the artist. We admire his
wisdom in selection and concept; his skill and ingenuity in
execution. We know that genius, ability, perseverance and
determination have contributed toward his artistic success —
that he only succeeded by an endless study of fundamentals
and by continually staying with each problem until it
was mastered.

The study of art does not consist in continually
searching for something new in the way of principles but
rather in an intensive analysis of old principles. When the
purpose and flexibility of principles is understood it is
easier to form new ideas and translations built upon these
very essentials.

Many students feel that once they learn the main factors
they can set them aside and search for something new —
some new secret that will make artistic procedure easy. This

137
CONCLUSION

is a mistake. The fundamental principles should always be
kept foremost in mind and studied over and over again.

Whenever a new idea comes along it should be
compared with principles that govern it. If the idea is
constructive, it will conform to fundamental principles; if
not, the idea should be abandoned. Selection and rejection
is important in all phases of art — even in choosing or
discarding ideas.

A new idea may either make or spoil an arrangement.
The determining factor of a new idea is, does it strengthen or
weaken the composition? Therefore, each new idea must be
sound and easily integrate into the organization of the other
parts in the unity and not be a disturbing note. Unless each
idea, mark or brush stroke creates and preserves this unity,
the harmony is disturbed and some major fundamental has
been obviously violated.

Yet no student should ever be discouraged with such
mistakes for they are part of the profession. The art of
painting is a matter of seeing mistakes, overcoming obstacles
and keeping fundamental principles always at hand. No one
is ever so proficient that he can entirely ignore errors,
side-step obstacles and forget principles.

Although we may vary our ideas or translate each
principle differently, we should at all times have a thorough
understanding and conviction concerning the primary
purpose of each artistic factor, We should study and analyze
the principles and their purpose. Each principle has an
especial place in the unity of the picture, though in each
picture these principles may be applied in any one of their
infinite variations.

The essence of each principle is its main idea which may
employ one or more of its variations to create one given
quality. How to apply this idea to suit each particular picture
is a problem for the individual student and not a problem for
his advisor.

When suggestions about art and its factors are listed
separately, the matter of artistic understanding appears

138
CONCLUSION

tremendous. The means of achieving artistic quality are
varied and many. But the purpose of all items is toward
a single purpose, namely unity or harmony in the ultimate
picture.

Principles have to do chiefly with the mental approach
in art.

The mechanics in painting are best improved when the
mind is trained and disciplined. Actual painting is always
governed by the mental, emotional and imaginative faculties.
Therefore, these factors should be developed and coordin-
ated with manual practice. The student should have an
insatiable desire to collect all possible information, then
consolidate this information in forming hiw own convictions.

The first and last important matter in the study and
practice of art is knowledge.

In acquiring this knowledge, serious thought, analysis
and meditation is needed. A general idea of the purely
esthetic purpose of art must be formed before we can hope to
understand and employ the means by which artistic quality
is created.

139
=

Pencil 12 x 14

Breton Tuna Boats

140
ADDENDA

By EVELYN PAYNE HATCHER

It is clear from the material he left that my father had planned to
include sections on the steps involved in his methods, on the use of
color, and on painting in tempera. Some of his color illustrations have
been preserved, and with the opportunity to add color reproductions,
we put these into some kind of order with some reproductions of
his work. In this edition, I have added a few other items, including
some of my mother’s lessons and works that seem to clarify and enrich
his text, as well as a number of his finished painting that put it
all together.

My parents shared many basic attitudes towards art, although
their styles were very different. My mother was a good teacher, artic-
ulate and well organized in terms of preparing lessons on the basic
principles. My father found teaching difficult, and did not take stu-
dents until the Great Depression. He taught by demonstration, and
took students outdoors and made suggestions to them individually.
Both of my parents expressed exasperation with beginners who
expected to go out on one or two sketching trips and come back with
finished works of art; it was the process, the learning, even the strug-
gle that was to them more important that the product. My father con-
sidered his color sketches made in the field as studies for his own use;
he did not sign or sell them as a rule, although many are highly
regarded today.

A favorite story about my dad is the account of a time when he
was out sketching, far from any sign of habitation. He was surprised
to find a man behind him, watching. Then the man said, “Why, that’s
nuthin’ but puttin’ on daubs!” A little later the man shook his head
and said, “But you sure gotta know where to put them daubs!” and
walked away.

METHODS

Learning where to put them daubs is what his book is all about.
It was interesting to see all the study that went into any subject that my
father painted. He worked with anatomy of horses, although he rarely
painted them in a detailed way. He sketched the rigging of various
types of fishing boats, and made a detailed scale model of a Breton
fishing yawl, yet if a pulley appeared at all in a finished work, it was

141
Co])! peek

HK ive
I >
ED phe

142
ADDENDA

not more than one of those daubs. Examples from his notebooks
show that sometimes the sketches are studies in the shape or the struc-
ture of his subjects, sometimes they are thoughts as to the ways the
subjects could be arranged to make an interest composition. He
always has a small notebook in his kit, and often one in his pocket,
along with a short 6B pencil. (See opposite, and p. 61).

Sensitivity to the natural world meant that composition was not
only a matter of good design in the abstract sense, but involved the
knowledge of the subject so that the composition would bring out its
characteristic qualities and the feeling of the scene. Trees provide an

example; the detailed anatomy of trees is involved in appropriate com-
position, and he made many studies of trees both in pencil and color.

PERSPECTIVE

When houses and buildings are included in a landscape, a knowl-
edge of linear perspective is necessary (p. 70). It is often not realized
that the same principles apply to natural landscape, for example, shad-

» Q

Saieahing Point High Lighted Surfaces Indicate Perspective Shadows Tonvandid in Reropective
ows on the ground must fall so that they lie in the directions of the
vanishing point. (See also Plate XI, p. 97).

Color perspective involves both hue and value (p. 72) The paint-
ing of the Grand Canyon (CPSB) shows a bold use of color perspec-
tive that gives not only a sense of distance but of depth. It is the use

143
ADDENDA

of color that enabled him to show mountains and cliffs that are soft-
ened by distance and atmosphere, and yet retain their solidity and
structure. Studies of rock formations for structure of course played a
part (CP-10D).

The scale of values is also important in dealing with “the colors
seen outdoors and the pigment of canvas” (p. 94). In order to give light
to the sky or sunlit areas, for example, the darks of the foreground are
painted with colors much darker than the eye sees. It is this relation-
ship of dark to light that permits harmonizing modifications of bright
areas to get atmosphere and depth of field (CP-10F).

My parents, who used similar palettes and shared many ideas
about art, had very different styles. And some of their teachings show
differences in approach. My mother’s way of drawing was often very
different from the sketchy way practiced and recommended by my
father. She constructed shapes, and had a great sense of the solidity of
forms. After all, she came to easel painting from commercial art, hav-
ing been nationally recognized for her billboard designs, while my
father came from a career as a scene painter in the theater.

For example, my father said (p. 64): “It...helps to get away from
the habit formed by many students of drawing an outline around each
subject, then filling the boundaries with color — an inartistic habit.”

Yet I noticed that Mother sometimes filled in the outlines, and
there are styles that to a large extent depend on line and local color, as
in many Japanese ukiyo-e prints. But Mother’s preferred subjects were
people and human surroundings, while he portrayed light and air and
great distances, And, of course, at that point he was writing about cre-
ating a good composition, not on drawing an object. That he recog-
nized the worth of other styles can be seen from his remarks on deco-
rative style (p. 65).

Mother experimented with many media and styles. She like
opaque watercolor (gouache) for outdoor sketching, as it dries quickly
and one can add to the composition by drawing items with a brush
over existing work. In this case she drew rapidly and sketchily. Plein
aire painters seldom paint larger works in the field, because the light
often changes too rapidly. Sometimes as in early morning and near
sundown, very rapidly indeed. One suspects that Dad’s oil sketches
were done in less than half an hour.

144
SS TY ee SS
Elsie Palmer Payne Gouache 12 x 13
‘A California Home”

Elsie Palmer Payne Gouache 12 x 15
“Dry Goods Brittany”

145
ADDENDA

While the basic principles of composition remain the same, dif-
ferent mediums are often quite different in technique, especially when
opaque paint such as oil of gouache is compared to a transparent
medium such as wash watercolor.

A statement that recurs in the first chapter is that knowledge
must precede execution. I’m sure he did not mean book knowledge
primarily; he meant that one should learn to see artistically by draw-
ing and by experiment before trying to produce a finished work of art.

It is interesting to learn how many different ways there are to
approach the process of drawing. One has to adapt one’s method to
the subject, the medium, as well as one’s own preferences (p. 62). Dad
planned compositions with pencil drawings and so was able to paint
rapidly at the easel without laboring over layout. This book grew out
of those many thoughtful evenings.

Both my parents insisted that practice in drawing from nature
teaches one to really see, which is rewarding in itself. The more you
draw what you see, the more you see. And only those who can draw
well can modify or distort the image effectively for an artistic purpose.

ae
RSA,

<
e

Z

Breton Boats Pencil 8 x 10

146
ADDENDA
STEPS IN THE PAINTING PROCESS

The first step in his method was to select and arrange the ele-
ments of the scene he wished to use (Chapter I). When he had
decided what the main subject was to be: trees, sky, hills, water, etc., he
then tried out differing compositions. (Plates VII to X). He did not
draw many of these when working outdoors sketching, but went
through the process mentally. In planning studio paintings he made
many pencil sketches, often in the evening, trying out different compo-
sitions and planning the next day’s painting.

Nearly All Shadow

In the field he sometimes used a little ext]
cardboard frame to view a part of the OUT
scene and to help select and visualize
the composition.

Either in the field or in the studio, the second step was to draw
the scene on canvas with charcoal, sometimes very sketchily, some-
times in some detail, depending on the subject, with indications of
darker areas.

147
DRAWINGS MEANT TO BE PAINTED

Sierra Lake Poncil 7x O

EMEHR-PAYAE.

Navajo Riders Pencil ll x 14

148
ADDENDA

The third step was to establish the pattern of darks and lights
(values) by painting a wash or stain (often thin red ochre) over the
dark or shadowed areas (CP-9A and CP-9B).

Fourth, working all over the canvas, he used thin paint to estab-
lish the color scheme (CP-9D).

Fifth, thicker pigment was applied to the dark areas in hues that
would be appropriate for the shadowed places — for example the dark
trees in CP-9D. Then applying heavier paint, he gave attention to the
solidity of forms, “modeling,” (p. 78). He worked to some extent from
dark to light, as is traditional in oil painting, but also tended to work
all over the canvas to maintain the relationships between dark and
light, warm and cool, in accordance with the color scheme he had in
mind, leaving only the highlights for the last.

The steps outlined above were those used for oil painting, but he
followed very similar procedures when he worked in opaque water-
color (tempera), which is rather unusual. In both he often covered the
whole work with wash or stain in transparent color (CP-9F) and
added the opaque color in daubs as in oil painting. The underlying
color often showed in small areas between daubs, giving vibrancy to
the finished work. At times he used a colored paper to give this effect
(CP-9C and CP-10A).

When I was told that many copies of this book are assigned by
art teachers, I began to think about using it as a teacher, or how I
would see it as a student. When one is learning, especially at first, there
are so many aspects of painting that one is trying to remember that it
can be discouraging because the results do not come out as one had
hoped. My mother’s lessons on basic principles kept occurring to me
and I thought that dealing with one aspect at a time, as she had her
students do in a series of exercises, would be a great help. Then when
one is before a scene to be painted, these aspects can be tackled in
some kind of order, instead of chasing each other around in one’s
head.

My father discusses the importance of the basic principles
(pp. 5-8) but mother analyzed them and spelled them out for begin-
ners. Here I have selected a few that directly relate to the material that
has gone before in this volume. The material [ am drawing on is in a
folder with some of her notes and plans to do a book, and some of the
illustrations were probably done by students, as it was her habit to set
the problem and let them work it out. The rest is what I remember, or
in some cases, what I have learned from my own work.

149
ADDENDA

In the examples below you can see how Dad laid out the darks
and lights of the composition as he was drawing it. He was aware of
grades of dark and light all along while most beginners think first in
terms of local color.

One of the exercises Mother used called for learning to make
compositions with black, white and grey only. She thought that even
persons of considerable experience would benefit from exercises that
help one to see in these terms.

Arrangements of paper cut-outs

In one exercise, she had the students paint strips of black, white,
and grey in varying proportions and varying orders, then add land-
scape touches to half of the strips.

150
ADDENDA

Dad’s use of the word “line” applies usually to the structural
lines of composition, not to the quality of individual pencil or char-
coal lines. But the soft 6B pencil he used gave great variety to the lines
in his composition drawings, qualities that do not show in the illustra-
tion in the text.

es

= ee
my, ay i ae

Previously unpublished illustrations recently discovered in the

£ -ayne archives.

151
ADDENDA

Compositions can be analyzed in different ways. I am sometimes
surprised at the way some great work of art is diagrammed in an art
history book, as I had seen the patterns somewhat differently.

Two main schemes can be combined. For example, the simple
basic of the power of thirds often can be seen in other patterns. This
can sometimes serve as a test of the layout, and help one to judge the
effect. Not that in a great many of the types shown in the drawings
above, the focal points are a third of the distance from an edge.

152
ADDENDA

COLOR

In the text he advocates preparing one’s own spectrum for the
knowledge one gains. Standard color wheels are easy to find in books,
but there is no substitute for making one’s own. (p. 88ff).

For a long time J found it difficult to understand the terminology
of color, so I offer some definitions here: Hue is what is usually called
“color”; the blueness or redness or greenness of a color. Hue may be
thought of as the position of color in a pure color circle. He does not use
the term “hue” because he felt the meaning clear enough without this
technical term. Intensity is sometimes called “purity” or “saturation”. It
refers to the brilliance or clarity of a color. “Saturation” is, however,
sometimes used with reference to mixture, as on page 88. Shade is used
in the color circle (p. 90) to indicate a mix of a hue with its complement,
to make it less intense, more neutral. But “shade” is sometimes differ-
ently used to mean areas in shadow — these are dark in value but not
necessarily neutral in hue. Sometimes “a shade” is even used to mean a
hue, so the meaning depends on context. Value refers to lightness or
darkness (p. 78). A black and white photograph depends on a scale of
values. Tint is used to indicate the lightening of the value of a color (hue)
with white, and thus refers to a light color.

Once one has a complete, home-made color chart, one can experi-
ment with color combinations. Color experiments using basic ideas, one
or two at a time, are recommended in the short section of color, and sug-
gested by the color illustrations CP-2 and CP-3. Certainly he also exper-
imented for his own use.

An exercise that is now often assigned in color theory classes
involves making a multiplication table grid of perhaps 25 or more
squares. With a single hue one makes gradations of shade in one dimen-
sion, and gradations of value along the other. This really brings home
the enormous variation possible.

An interesting experiment with the “soup” method (p. 92) can be
done by drawing a series of small sketches of the same scene, all very
much alike. Color is applied to the first just as it comes from the tube,
naive style; blue sky, green trees, red roof, yellow flowers and the like. The
second is painted with the same colors to which white has been added.
For the third, a “soup” is made with yellow and white and added to each
and every color used. Soup for subsequent sketches is made with blue,
red, green and so forth, each with white, one at a time.
Purple with yellow

COMPLEMENTARIES

COMPLEMENTARIES

Yellowish tint Cool colors

HARMONIES
CP-2 Color Relationships

156
Warm with cool Cool with warm

Gray predominating

Purple-red and green-yellow Neutral pervading
COMPLEMENTS AND NEUTRALS
CP-3 Color Relationships

157
age “asec ok

CP-4 Swoies Village

CP-4B — Mountains in Switzerland

158

Oil 28 x 34

CP-5A Red Mesa Oil 25 x 30

CP-5B Grand Canyon Oil 20 x 25

159
BOCA

CP-0A Oak Trees Oil 20 x 2

See

CP-6B — San Juan Capistrano Oil 28 x 34

160
Courtesy of The Irvine Museum

CP-7B California Landscape Oil 24 x 28
Courtesy of The Irvine Museum

161
CP-8A Gouache 12 x 12
“At Anchor” Italian Boats

CP-8B _ Italian Boats Oil 20 x 24

162
CP-O Unfinished sketches (EAP); oil, A, B, E, D. Gouache, F Gouache on colored paper, C.

163
44 FS

CP-12A Chateau Briand O?Ox 12

CP-12B Brittany Harbor Oil 28 x 34
Courtesy of the Redfern Gallery

166
CP-13B Sierra Lake Oi] 24 x 28
Courtesy of The Flaxington Collection

167
>
ae —

Pe
ss

cs ts
CP-14-A French Fishing Boats, Concarneau Harbor
Private Collection

CP-14B Sierra Lake
Courtesy of The Flaxington Collection

168

Oil 28 x 34

OO x 12
Students of Asiatic art have noted the importance of “negative”
or “empty” space in Chinese landscape painting. The misty featureless
area that lies between the foreground and the mountains is analogous to
silence and evokes the mystic and the spiritual.

In Canyon de Chelly, I find this quality in the view through the
opening to which the eye is led by every aspect of the composition.

CP-15 Canyon de Chelly Oil 25 x 30
Courtesy of the Don Bennett Collection

169
CP-10A Hills of Lavender Oil 12 x 10

170
——

Oil Painting Sierra Peaks | 10x DR

Oil Painting Wood's Cove, Laguna Beach 12x15

ISBN 0-939370-11-5
