Edgar Payne - Composition in Outdoor Painting

CHAPTER I
THE APPROACH TO ART

ORIGIN AND PURPOSE

All creative endeavor is toward a definite purpose.
Therefore, it is imperative that we have a definite conception
of this purpose as well as a clear understanding of the
means that accomplish this end. Quality in fine pictures is
dependent on a knowledge and a respect for the elements
which create it. Actually a fine painting is a composite of all
its factors and influences. Bringing these together, to form
this composite, creates the process of composing. Hence the
study of composition is a matter of studying art and all of its
factors and influences.

That art is entirely an abstract or invisible element and
true artistic procedure seeks to conceal governing influences
means we cannot approach the subject directly but must go
back to the beginning and look into the purpose of artistic
expression or the reason for its being. Then search out, study
and analyze each factor or principle having either remote or
direct bearing on origin, theory or practice.

Robert Henri once said that art is not actually intended
but is the result of a desire to express, and a need for appre-
ciation. To these factors may be added the enjoyment of
nature and an instinctive desire to excel. A desire to excel or
attain perfection is the inevitable result of creative effort.
The competitive or idealizing sprit undoubtedly plays an
important part in picturization.

Idealizing comes from the love of beauty and enjoyment
in its translation, also the desire to translate and create a
quality that will give the utmost degree of enjoyment to
others. The love of beauty in nature and in creative work is
instinctive and fundamental in each individual.

Whether the interest in picturization is that of the
humble, the unlearned or the cultured esthete, pictures fill
a definite need.

Sir John Gilbert says, “A room with pictures and a
room without pictures differ nearly as much as a room with
windows and a room without windows; for pictures are
loopholes of escape to the soul, leading it to other scenes and
spheres, where the fancy for a moment may revel, refreshed
and delighted. Pictures are consolers of loneliness, and a
relief to the jaded mind, and windows to the
imprisoned thought; they are books, histories and sermons
— which we can read without the trouble of turning over
the leaves.”

Mankind needs distraction from the material and
commonplace things of life. We seek solace in those things
which bring peace to the mind and relaxation to the body.
More than all, we desire through the expression of feelings
and emotions understanding with our fellow beings.

Long before houses were built, primitive man not only
sought express himself pictorially, but realized also the
need for receptive appreciation. Therefore he left visible
records on the walls of caves and in the sheltered crevices of
cliffs. In his relaxation from struggles with wild animals and
his enemies, the prehistoric artist responded to natural
instincts which called for needs beyond shelter and
sustenance. With his crude tools and limited knowledge, he
had ample opportunity to exercise his ingenuity; and so in
order to better his expression he set about devising new tools
and other innovations. He sought ochres and carbons to fill
in his crude outline drawings, then soon began to practice
simple shading, modeling and relating objects.

At first the early pictorialist knew little of organization
or combining several ideas to express a larger one and
usually depicted one item for each idea. Later he found
that by relating the objects drawn, broader ideas could be
revealed. If a wild boar, deer or buffalo were pictured, each
carried the idea of that animal, but if a man with
a spear were added, the relation produced broader
significance. Combining several items to convey a message
then became, probably, one of the first general principles
in art. As time went on other elementary factors were
developed.

Through the ages, subsequent artists kept up the
progression by new ideas, new principles and new modes of
expression. Thus the institution of art has been maintained
by virtue of the talents, innovations and accomplishments of
all contributing artists.

TALENT AND GENIUS

Talent is naturally the first thing to be considered in
any analysis of art. Without it any other qualifications are
worthless. Talent represents an inherent instinct of adapta-
tion or native ability, while genius is the power to utilize and
integrate all imaginative faculties and practical ideas. Genius
also creates the force of perseverance and determination.
Sir Joshua Reynolds puts it this way: “Genius is supposed
to be a power of producing excellencies which are out of
reach of the rules of art; a power which no precepts can
teach, and which no industry can acquire.”

Although opinions on art and its principles may
differ, it is invariably agreed that talent and genius cannot
be acquired, that both are essential to creative work and
that all artistic work comes primarily from these inherent
faculties.

Talent comes into being with the individual. Everyone
who comes to earth has some creative ability, and among
these are some that have exceptional adaptability to express
in special forms. Those who lean toward pictorial work
begin early to draw and observe all that has to do with
this medium of expression. Their first renderings were
perhaps the simplest ideas expressed with only crude draw-
ings and elementary colors. No doubt but at one time in

childhood every great artist has depicted in much the
same manner.

A curious fact along this line is that a similar method —
a simple outline of objects filled with a few colors is used by
primitive men and children. In the work of both groups there
is often evidence of the divine spark of originality. Then too,
their picturization often reveals a simplicity — a naive
manner of expression which is a vital factor in the work of
any era or period. The big problem of instruction in art is
to preserve these inherent natural powers. Other lines of
education presents the same problem. No one can give any
new powers the student. All that can be done is to show him
how he may develop his natural abilities. This is much easier
said than done.

While. talent or genius must exist, at best they are
merely embryonic factors and no one can guide these
into productive artistry without the initiative, perseverance
and determination of the student. To say that the artist
is born and not made, is only partly true. Actually, while
it is an important qualification, there is no proof of real
worth in talent until it has been developed and expanded
by a tremendous amount of serious study and plain
hard work.

ELEMENTARY PRINCIPLES

The elementary principles of art are but general broad
ideas resulting from the origin and purpose of art, the
thought, analysis and experience of artists, philosophers and
other thinkers. These elementary principles are authentic
guidance, yet are flexible and capable of unlimited variation,
although their origin is in facts, truths and natural laws,
which are more inflexible.

New ideas, rules and mannerisms are equally important
— they are the progressive instruments — yet temporary and
only expedients for the individual painters and individual
pictures. But, truths and principles are the stabilizing
permanent foundation. They never change or progress but
remain eternally the same and form a basis in fact for exer-
cising individuality.

Originality in art is not a matter of trying to invent
new principles but is a matter of creating new modes or
mannerisms based on artistic fundamentals. New principles
are only developed during a century or more of time and
then only after many minds have evolved the main ideas of
such principles. Before they are accepted as principles, new
main ideas in art must be subjected to every test including
that of time. Additionally, major innovations must integrate
with the elementary principles of origin and always be
based on natural laws. Truth must lie at the foundation of all
constructive ideas in art. Thought, like art, is a continuous
progression. Often, in our vanity we think we are strictly
original in our ideas, when, as a matter of fact, we have only
borrowed or built upon thoughts that have been handed
down from the past.

The main principles of art have been originated or
preempted long ago by others. Consequently, it is only by
studying the wisdom in these accepted principles and
traditions that we can guide our thoughts along constructive
lines. Emerson says: “Many ideas grow better when
transplanted into another mind than in the one where they
sprung up.”

In order to stimulate thought, the inventive and
imaginative powers, and encourage original viewpoints, the
art should be continually studied. Upon these the beginner
may mold his own growing convictions. Sound ideas are the
basis of all creative work. So, to begin properly, the student
should be encouraged to form his own concepts. He should
however be sure these concepts are not imitative or incapable
of being applied in a practical way. His success or failure
will depend on the soundness of his own conclusions
during the formative period. “As the twig bends, so shall the
limb grow.”

Whatever theories the beginner adopts, he will do well
to remember that independence in thought, guided by a

consideration for fundamental principles and nature is the
safest road to individuality. He should also remember
originality consists mainly in a respect for tradition and
precedents, by accepting other men’s ideas, then using
personal invention in coordinating these with his own.

To be original one needs to learn the ideas of other
painters in order to be different from them.

The primordial base of art is its elementary principles.
These are the inevitable consequence of the desire and need
for betterment and progress. Principles are broad, abstract
instruments which combine with a certain measure of
reason to guide imagination, invention and emotional
impulses as well as skill in the manipulation of drawing
mediums and paints.

The desire to express, to excel or idealize; the enjoyment
of nature; the love of beauty; and talent or genius are
elemental factors in the origin of art. The artist must also
have other qualifications such as active imagination, strong
inventive faculties, independence in thought, initiative,
determination and perseverance. Additionally he needs a fine
appreciation of quality, originality, together with distinct
mannerisms in translating or creating quality, both visual
and abstract. This means a worthwhile idea in concept and
finesse or skill in manipulating drawing mediums and paints.
A respect for nature, traditions, conventions and principles
should always be in order.

A painter needs to study, meditate, experiment and
practice interminably.

The painting requires nobility in its concept, variety,
rhythm, repetition, unity, balance and harmony in its
composition. The drawing needs general accuracy,
approximate proportion of form or mass and direction of
line. Values and modeling require proper sequences and
graduations, color, balance and harmony. Perspective or
recession 1s essential.

These elements form the composite background for
artistic rendering. Some of these factors are analogous and
some are embraced in the larger principles. Yet consideration
for all is needed in a full pictorial representation. Inside all,
and between some of these factors or principles, instinctive
judgment in selecting the measures, quantities or influences
of each is necessary for different problems. All of the factors,
influences or principles are elastic and capable of much
variation. None of them can restrict beyond a reasonable
degree. Another great principle remains — that of freedom
or artistic leeway.

The artist demands that his imagination and creative
powers have minimum restraint. Freedom in expression is
the factor that defends natural expression and determines
originality. Yet at best, the phrase is merely a conventional
term intended to illustrate a principle; albeit an important
one if considered in its rightful meaning.

“Liberty under law” is not only an axiom of both
democracy and of art, but also an essential of each. It is
doubtful if any civilized person could live happily or do
worthwhile creative work without exercising a reasonable
degree of freedom. A reasonable degree means a respect for
other elementary principles.

Each free government is build upon a code of principles
which upholds and guarantees a certain degree of freedom
for its nationals. These principles are in turn supported by
conventional rule or Jaw. The institution of art has come
down through the ages by the same process. Progress in any
line is dependent upon observance of the entire code of laws
or principles. Freedom is only freedom when it is guided by
respect for other conventions.

Both in government and in art the great question is,
how much personal liberty shall be subordinated to the
conventional rule or law of the main institution, or how far
can these be set aside for personal freedom? The question is
unanswerable. However the problem does furnish proof of
the dependence of one principle on others. Freedom in
expressing pictorially needs to respect nature and natural
expression on the one end, and elementary principles and
traditions on the other.

OPPOSITION OF INFLUENCES

At the basis of all things there is energy, activity or
power — call it what you will — that is produced between
opposing forces. We have poles of positive and negative
electricity. Water and fire create energy through steam. In
the words of Pythagoras, “If there be light then there is
darkness; if cold, then heat; if height, depth also; if solid,
then fluid; hardness and softness; calm and tempest;
prosperity and adversity.” Almost everything has its oppo-
site. Between these ends is created a vitalizing third
element that gives life, balance or rhythm.

This principle is evident in the origin, purpose, theory,
practice, in fact all phases of art. The intuitive judging
between influences may be said to be the basis for abstract
quality.

In the reasons of origin, theoretically we set a pattern or
an ideal which in this instance is equivalent to the adage, “art
for art’s sake.” In other words, the objective is figuratively the
pleasure of depicting. However, being firstly humans and
secondly artists, we actually anticipate subsequent satisfac-
tion in achievement or approbation from competent critics,
or even (soft pedal) pecuniary gain. Between these desires
comes the opportunity to test the artistic sensibilities of the
painter. Like all processes in art, this is a matter of balance
and counterbalance. In nearly all other instances the greater
influence may be either factor, though in this case the more
powerful force should be the enjoyment of painting. This
represents activity and production, while satisfaction of
attainment denotes repose or reward.

However, having tasted the fruits of labor or the reward,
and the taste being good, the artist may tarry and rest too long
on his oars. Consequently, pleasure in depiction might be
hampered by remembrance of tasteful fruit. The main object
of the painter should be to fully enjoy the means of obtaining
his visual expression and, in turn, enjoy the satisfaction of a
work well done; then consider the latter an incentive or means
to even greater pleasure in his next picturization.


Perhaps one of the most important pairs of opposites
is natural talent or native ability on one end and principles
or conventions on the other. The proper balance of
influence between these two ends may be productive of
fine artistic results, while an improper measure could spell
disaster.

Other opposing factors may be considered; for example,
the conscious and subconscious mind. The former has to
do with the more factual things and the latter with the
more abstract elements. The conscious mind denotes reason,
truth, facts, and is concerned with the things we learn, while
the subconscious indicates instinct or the influence of
natural impulses. We say that art is purely the result of
subconscious guidance, merely to illustrate the principle
of an ideal circumstance. It is very doubtful if anyone could
use any physical activity without conscious thought.
Certainly if we should be unconscious of physical control,
physical action would hardly be possible. Moreover, any
kind of an injury might result. Without a doubt some
reason or a certain degree of conscious guidance is needed
to balance the subconscious impulses and other purely
abstract influences.

In painting from nature the artist is faced with the
problem of judging between the influence of realism and
the power of his artistic ingenuity. The latter leads him to the
extreme of imagination, while nature counteracts by
demanding a respect for her truths.

Compositional arrangements require balance between
large masses and detail. Drawing requires balance of
straight, vertical, horizontal and curved lines; equalization
between contrasts and subtle nuances of values is needed.
Color requires contrasts or complements and harmonious
analogies. Unequal measures in the light and shaded parts of
objects are essential for artistic balance.

The opposition between two or more influences never
suggests the extent of measures, but it does emphasize the
fact that art is not the product wholly of one thing or another,
but is always the result of composite influences. This is a
simple statement. It has tremendous significance.

The whole procedure of appreciation, study, concept
and actual painting is a matter of working between the
influence of various factors. Just how much each shall influ-
ence is something that no one can say. The judgment must
always come from the individual, and even he will vary his
taste and decision by subconscious instinct to suit each mood
and circumstance.

Within a composite of influences the mystic charm of
art is born. It comes into being in the abstract interval
between a thought and a reality and no one, not even the
artist, can remeasure the influence that caused it.

RULES

General rules are usually intended to guard against
unsound ideas or practices, in order that appreciation or
the instinctive feeling for unity may be developed. There
are definite pitfalls, and bad habits to be avoided in
composting or painting. Therefore the student needs some
authoritative guidance on which to depend when his judgment
is inadequate.

The use of conventional rules to call attention to
principles is the only method of training the intuitive
judgment to avoid errors that spoil balance or harmony.
Rules are broad enough to aid the student in forming his
own ideas or convictions without hurting his individuality
or originality.

While most convictions or decisions may be subject to
change, there are some that may well remain unalterable. Not
the least and the first among these is the identity of the goal
toward which the study is directed. Naturally, the ultimate
result is the painting.

Nevertheless many students allow themselves to see
only the result and neglect the means of reaching it.
They are like the oversoul, who sees only the bank of
the stream to be crossed, without considering how
to cross.

The glamour of any achievement should never over-
shadow the means of producing it. A desire to paint well
should be the desire to perfect all artistic faculties.

It has often been said that art students may do anything
they like in the study and practice of art. This may be true in
one sense. However, a literal translation of this statement
used as a criterion, might prove fallacious. A sensible idea
of the purpose of art and the definition and value of its prin-
ciples, is an asset to any student.

The first thing in the study of art is sound, extensive
knowledge. The next is to know how to apply it.

Some writers on art set forth rather rigid rules to guide
study and practice. Others go so far as to designate artistic
procedure as the science of painting. On the other hand,
many say that rules should be absolutely taboo. Again it has
been stated that “rules are devised for slaves.” Thus we have
opposing beliefs and the intention here is not to condemn
any of these but to show extremes of thought. Somewhere
between these contradicting views a basis for constructive
ideas may be found.

In order to be progressive, many viewpoints are
needed. As a matter of fact, rules considered at the right
time and place are of undoubted worth, rightly used they
can aid greatly in creative work. Considered wrongly,
they may prove to be deceptive as the famed sirens of
Ulysses, leading onto dangerous shoals or even to complete
artistic disaster.

In many activities outside of creative work, definite
rules and formulas may be set up and followed to the letter
of the law. In the case of useful arts and mechanical profes-
sions, absolute adherence to strict laws and methods are
essential to success. Here, one has to do as others in the same
line have done. Not so in creative art. No one can apply the
same rules directly to the painting of each picture without
lessening artistic quality.

After all, rules are only conventional terms intended
to prevent grave mistakes and to guide the process along
channels that will produce the maximum quality in each
factor in order that it in turn, will contribute the same
measure to the whole harmony. Rules were never meant to be
formulas for building pictures, but rather, to instruct in the
storing up of knowledge and aiding skill or facility which
may be brought forth later. The first and last purpose of all
rules, traditions and principles is to aid the study, self-
discipline and training toward an intuitive depiction.

IMAGINATION AND THE EMOTIONAL IMPULSES

Imagination is an image-making power common to all.
Its origin is in fact and its end in fantasy; yet a purposeful
fancy guided by at least some measure of reason. Imagination
is the great spring of creative activity — the fountain of artis-
tic fantasies which are the daydreams of children grown up.
Paradoxical as it may seem, the right way to conceive and
practice art, regardless of the degree of efficiency, is with the
viewpoint of a child. From Sir Alfred East comes the
suggestion that we should approach nature for depiction with
the heart and mind of a child. But let this not be construed
to mean that the painter go unprepared, without knowledge,
ability and strength. Mr. East says further, that we must not
become over-awed or grovel before nature, but should stand
up and paint from the shoulder like men.

The artist must have strength as well as emotions,
moreover, he needs to make use of both.

When the artist has schooled and disciplined himself
to the point where he can respond to natural impulses, the
real enjoyment in painting begins. Reason, study, and
experience have taught him the importance of sound
constructive thought and an instinctive feeling for quality or
beauty. A circumstantial state of mind needs to be created
where self assurance aids the sensitive influence of intuition
in judging the proper measures between factors to suit each
particular rendition. A feeling for the measures must be
maintained. In singing, writing, and other creative or
interpretive practice, feeling is the keynote. The violinist
does not consciously think of measures on his fret board,
because there are none. He feels each note, its pitch,
vibration and place in the main harmony. So, too, does the
painter. He feels the measures between each influence and
varies their worth to suit each problem in composition.
A feeling for measures in the parts is a feeling for the
entire unity. Such intuitive judgment is the thing that creates
personality or individuality in the work.

Within all of us there is an inner source which sends
forth and receives emotional impulses. Under proper
conditions these impulses influence the appreciation of
nature and her moods. The artist, therefore, is a creature with
exceptional response to emotions, yet at the same time he
must have strength and be fortified with knowledge and
reason. “He who cannot respond to his emotions with some
reasonable guidance is incapable of expressing himself in an
artistic manner.”

Many things enter into or influence the process of
thought which develop the artistic powers; the emotional
impulse is the first and not the least of these. Important as
pigment manipulation may be, it is barren of artistic results
if the training of the mind, natural instincts and emotional
reactions are illy considered.

NATURE

Nature must not be forgotten. The habit of continually
painting outdoor motives from imagination will eventually
produce only “studio pictures” without the feeling of real
outdoor qualities.

Nature is not the least concerned with artistic
attributes, although she has prior claim on the artist and
insists that her qualities receive first attention. If she is
to be represented, she demands that she be not
occasionally but often consulted. Otherwise there is liable to
be trouble.

Nature always challenges the capabilities of the
imagination. Her variation in line, form, color and
ever-changing mood is infinitely beyond the variations
resulting purely from invention or imagination.

The human mind has an enormous capacity for storing
knowledge and conceiving ideas, yet is infinitesimally small
compared to nature when it comes to making suggestions
for pictorial expression. Therefore the artist must conclude
that while he needs to assert his artistic powers he must also
recognize and respect nature’s capacity and variety, which is
so much greater than his own.

Though the painter may have the greatest possible
talent, excellent training and most noble ideas or concepts,
he is still dependent, to a very great extent, upon nature.
To her he must go for ideas to be translated. A pictorial
representation is always a translation. Nature suggests ideas
for interpretation, the artist supplies ideas of how the
interpretation is to be made.

While it is important that the artist thoroughly
develop his artistic powers, it also is important that he use a
tremendous amount of observation, concentration and
painting to acquire sufficient knowledge of typical shapes,
proportions and other characteristics of outdoor form,
line and color, for as Whipple says: “Nature does not
capriciously scatter her secrets as golden gifts to lazy
poets and luxurious darlings, but imposes tasks when she
presents opportunities.”

It takes years to paint the human figure well, even
though models have much the same proportions and other
characteristics. Form in outdoor nature has much more
variation and the artist far more leeway than in figure
painting. Nevertheless outdoor form demands as much study
as any other subject.

A well developed knowledge of nature is one of the
most important assets in building the picture. All other
faculties being equal, to know outdoor form is to be able to
translate it into a fine pictorial edifice.

A proper visible structure is needed to house the unseen
abstruse quality which is art. For through the eye —
“window of the soul” — must come those visual qualities
which please the sight and the mind.

ABSTRACT AND VISUAL QUALITY

We say a painting is beautiful, not altogether because of
its surface appearance but because of its deeper mysterious
qualities that lie beyond definition by man. For art is a capri-
cious and whimsical mistress. She purposely flaunts
her visible attractions and cunningly conceals her methods
of achieving these. Yet through this disguise she reveals a
deeper and more significant charm. She, at the same time,
endeavors to thwart any attempt to solve the secret of this
fascinating unseen beauty.

Someone has said: “Art is an art of disguising art.” This
means that the painter is confronted with the problem of
building a material object and must attempt to conceal the
influence of all rules and principles in the process.
Contradictory as this may seem it is a fact. The theory of art
is always replete with both seeming and actual contra-
dictions. Instinctive powers seek to hide the influence of
reason, and reason, in turn, seeks to guide instinct.

The abstract finer sensitivities of judgment, feeling,
ennobling thoughts and appreciations create the abstruse,
unseen quality that defines art. Yet reason tells us that all of
these are primarily caused through the viewing of actual
physical nature, and the translation made by employing
physical materials to build an actual physical structure, at the
same time a structure built with visual skill.

Beauty in nature becomes artistic quality only through
beauty in skilled craftsmanship. Skill in handling pigment is
in itself beautiful.

Although taboo to some over-sophisticated minds,
beauty is always paramount quality both in the visual and
abstract sense. One is essential to the other. Under the
impulses brought about by its appreciation and enjoyment
one is led to create beauty in craftsmanship. Good crafts-
manship is always necessary. Skill, like beauty, is often
discarded these days. Yet a poorly painted picture could
hardly convey any of the finer sensations of abstract quality.
It is utterly impossible to feel quality in paintings unless it
is first seen in craftsmanship on the canvas.

In music the esthetic appreciations are all felt though
the sense of hearing the agreeableness of sound. In painting
the appreciation is through seeing the harmonious union
of line, form and color. In each case the finer sensual
pleasures first come through the physical action of hearing
actual quality in actual sounds and seeing actual beauty in
actual things.

KNOWLEDGE AND DISCIPLINE

The study of art is something that cannot be once
completed and then set aside. Knowledge is never complete.
Research and meditation are always the source of new
ideas. Aside from this, everyone, regardless of his degree of
proficiency, needs occasionally to review and take stock lest
he become stale, methodical, or rests in smug complacency.

While the artist needs to form convictions, he should, at
the same time, be open-minded. The saying that “one is never
too old to learn” is well applied to the painter. Not only are
new things always to be found, but the depictor must contin-
ually remind himself of those essentials he has already
learned and be ready to do more studying as each new motive
is painted. The true artist is always the student.

It is surprising how many beginners start painting
without any idea whatsoever of the mental approach, yet in
the early stages the mental approach is far more valuable
than attempting to paint right away. True, practice is equally
important, yet knowledge always precedes execution. No one
can paint better than he knows how. The proper develop-
ment of the mind is at least half of the equipment. The
observation needs to be continually tuned to keenness,
appreciation to its fullest degree, and the imaginative facul-
ties exercised constantly. The activities of the mind need to
be stimulated and practiced as well as the hand.

If we expect to do fine paintings we must think, study
and have a strong determination to overcome obstacles. As
soon as we put a mark upon the surface the composing
begins. At the same time its difficulties become apparent. It
is easy to recognize bad arrangement in other work, but
avoiding errors in our own is quite a different matter. No
blame for misjudgment can be placed in nature or any out-
side influences. When a pictorial unity is unsatisfactory, the
fault is entirely with the painter. He alone determines the
success or failure of each of his compositions.

The breadth or elasticity of principles gives the artist
ample room to exercise artistic freedom and assume author-
ity or the initiative to take hold of each problem and work it
out. The power to do this comes from ingenuity and determi-
nation, plus knowledge and training. Working out any prob-
lem depends on the ability to see errors, mistakes, obstacles
or room for improvement.

During the preparatory stage, as well as throughout the
career, problems and obstacles, both real and imagined, will
inevitably crop up. In overcoming or solving these, reason
and analysis are needed. Difficulties, either small or large, are
usually traceable to the violation of some major fundamen-
tal. When one properly considers the main factors, he gener-
ally finds in these the key to most solutions. Composing is a
matter of building up the unity step by step as items are
added to the arrangement. Whenever there is difficulty in the
harmony of the whole it can only come from misjudgment in
handling these items. This may be in placing objects, poor
consideration for line or wrong values, color, or even in poor
handling of pigment. Or the trouble might lie in the more
serious reasons of improper mental equipment or disrespect
for nature. Whatever it is, a retracing of principles and the
truths that underlie these is the solution.

Practically all painters occasionally have to set aside
their abstract procedure and consult the truth and facts or
principles presented by nature, science, tradition and prece-
dent. Their mental concept is then aided and their power of
intuition fortified so they can return to abstract procedure
more qualified to solve problems.

It is to be remembered that the artist is supposed to be
subconsciously guided only during the actual performance.
Between times he may put any amount of time he chooses on
research, analysis and conscious effort. Such procedure is not
unusual but is the regular custom. In fact, with the student,
it is a very good indication of seriousness and a determina-
tion to continue study, research and analysis.

The study of art is a lifetime matter. Any beginner may
as well make up his mind that he cannot learn all about
painting right away, and he might go further and realize that
he never will learn all about it. The best that anyone can do
is to accumulate all the knowledge possible of art and its
principles, study nature often and then practice continually.

Nature readily and constantly authenticates her appear-
ances. She does her part. Therefore the artist must be
prepared with the authority of sufficient knowledge and
training. He then may start his depiction with responsive,
respectful and enthusiastic interest. Enthusiasm is an impor-
tant asset. The plodder with even temperament does not go
far in painting.

According to Disraeli, “Every production of genius is
the production of enthusiasm.” Yet enthusiasm should never
lead beyond good taste or judgment. Knowledge or reason
always needs to check over-enthusiasm. Failure too will often
dampen too much ardor. With the student who has real
“stickability” a genuine failure is often better than a half-way
success.

Controlled enthusiasm in the right place is of great
worth in keying up all faculties. Enthusiasm guided by some
measure of reason makes picturing pleasurable, then too,
decisions can be more easily and confidently made.
Indecision is a bad influence in selecting and in painting. It
indicates a lack of confidence and produces wavering
touches on the canvas. Both of these are disastrous to the
development of skill. All choices should be made with
alacrity and work done in a manner that shows the artist
knows what he is about.

Many times a brush stroke put on with confidence
may be a little false, yet it might have a quality that
overcomes any slight error. Confidence is an important
factor, yet has very little worth unless backed up with other
well-developed faculties.

DIRECT AND REMOTE INFLUENCES

The profession of the artist is a profound one. It
demands a wide knowledge not only of its own essential fac-
tors, but a familiarity with philosophy and other doctrines
pertaining to the needs and desires of mankind. The theory
of art is irrevocably linked with nearly all other lines of cre-
ative and factual thinking.

Burke says, “Art can never give the rules that made art."

It has been said that the better way to study art is
indirectly through the study of science, history and philo-
sophy. These all have a distinct influence on it. But outside
of this, even apparently irrelevant items may aid in
some way.

It is a well known fact that many problems are solved
when the mind is far away from them. Solutions may come at
the most inopportune time, while we are about to drop off to
sleep, while holding conversation, listening to music, or dur-
ing any of the innumerable activities apart from the subject
in question.

Many students and artists, however, do not have enough
interest outside of painting, and often apply themselves too
closely to their work. This is a mistake. We do not live to
paint but rather to use it as a contributing factor to the art of
living. While it is necessary to subordinate many things and
do a tremendous amount of study and work in painting, we
should develop interest and appreciation in different things.
Some artists, poets and other creative workers often delve
into subjects far removed from their own media. This not
only gives them a broad knowledge but a relaxation from a
probable over-concentration.

Aside from this, all workers in the fine arts need to now
and then come down from the Olympian fields of fantasy. All
feet are of clay. Even though flights of fancy and imaginative
wanderings are essential in creative work, everyone must
occasionally meet the realities of life. Artistic productions
would probably be lacking in quality were not their footing
on the verities of nature and factual human requirements.

Although art is mainly concerned with appearances,
impulses and imaginative concepts, a respect for truth and
fact is always needed. Appearances are always dependent
upon material substance, and art is always dependent upon
thought and doctrines of other fields.

We do not go to art to learn its rules and principles,
nor for the truths that underlie these, but to the sciences
and philosophies of other subjects. Philosophy and science
are closely related to art. They attempt, in so far as they
can, to define art and all of its factors and principles.
Yet both science and philosophy can only go to a certain
point lest they encroach too far upon the domain of
intuitive procedure.

While science and philosophy furnish fact and truth as
a general basis, this basis is intended as an authority for
guidance in training the faculties to an instinctive perfor-
mance. Science and philosophy also builds up a storehouse
of knowledge or reserve for study and meditation, to be used
in the intervals between painting periods.

It is doubtful if any scientific rule may be applied
directly in the constructing of a picture without hurting its
artistic value. Attempts are continually made to set up a
mathematical ratio of proportions for composition, or other
factors in painting, yet it may be safely said that wherever
this is used as an inflexible and continued rule, the artistic
value is lessened.

In modern time, streamlining, other mechanical terms,
adverse influences and the tremendous number of isms
prevalent, cause true art to suffer. There is persistent effort to
set aside most principles, inject all sorts of irrelevant ideas
and adopt short cuts to lift the incompetent to fame.
However, if the student expects his work to fulfill the
intended purpose of art, he will have to do as someone has
said, “mix brains with paint.” This means that reason or
intelligence be used along with study and practice.


