Edgar Payne - Composition in Outdoor Painting

PREFACE

The most important ally in the study of painting is the art of thinking.

Excepting natural talent or genius, individuality in
thought is, without a doubt, the greatest single factor in
creative work.

Mindful of this idea, I have sought to stress its
importance by setting forth suggestions that may encourage
individual thought in the mind of the student.

According to most authorities, constructive ideas of art,
or any other subject for that matter, are best developed by
their transition through several minds. “Originality is but old
thought made over.”

The forms of composition and other principles of art
set forth in the following pages are those generally accepted
by most painters. These principles are not the property of
anyone but belong to all. Other suggestions are the result of
my own opinions, based on study, experimentation and
practice. Yet even in these, I lay no claim to originality as
most of the ideas have been expressed, perhaps in different
words, by others.

I have endeavored to bring out the main essentials and
their contributing factors as clearly as possible according to
my own way of thinking. In doing so, I am fully aware of the
difficulties of teaching art through the printed word. As
Harold Speed has said in essence that writing on art is much
like writing about the taste of a particular food — one
person may define a certain taste in one manner, and almost
everyone else describes it differently.

Owing to the abstract nature of art and its fundamental
principles, it is impossible to define either with any degree of
exactness. Therefore, only an indirect approach may be used.
This also has drawbacks as, in discussing both immediate
and remote factors, thought may lead far away from the


point in question. Therefore, I ask the reader to consider
always the principle involved or the main idea of the partic-
ular point under discussion.

Composing is not an element to be considered alone but
demands the study and application of all factors in art.
Creating pictorial unity and creating a fine panting is one
and the same thing.

The principle of judgment or activity between forces or
influences is an old one which may be applied to most any
subject. Many philosophical writers frequently call attention
to it. Its authenticity is based on its universal acceptance.
I feel that it is particularly important and very applicable
to procedure in art, since it offers logical analysis without
committing such analysis to rigid exactness or unreasonable
limitation in any other direction.

Each must have his own judgments and mannerisms and
every picture its own measures of influence. No law can
restrict all artists to one rule or all paintings to one measure
or quantity. Hence, giving proper instruction to each
individual student is the most difficult of problems. Methods
of teaching him to think or develop his own viewpoint are
practically non-existent. Scarce, too, are the means which
will prevent him from falling into the dangerous habit of
attempting to use suggestions as rules or methods to
construct pictures. Again, there is no sure way of getting
the beginner to use suggestion in training or disciplining
himself to the point where he can use his own instinctive
taste and judgment to suit each individual painting.

Two important facts should stand out strongly in the
mind of both the student and his adviser. The first, that no
one can give to another any creative powers. The student
must have natural ability, the genius to adapt is as well as the
perseverance and determination to succeed. The second, that
the goal in painting should never be the picture but the
means which produce it.

Art is always in the procedure — its manifestation in the
ultimate result.

There are always many who expect each book on art
to set forth an actual plan that may be applied in the


construction of pictures. I have purposely kept away from
this idea because I firmly believe that holding the study to the
accumulation of knowledge is the first consideration. True,
practice —- much of it — is essential, yet knowledge precedes
this. No one can successfully handle pigment unless he
knows why he is handling it.

I believe further that all fine creative work is built upon
previous thought and accomplishment, proven truths and
principles, coupled with new ideas, theories and mannerisms.

If one followed altogether only that which has been
done and has no new ideas, art would indeed fail and become
merely a poor imitation of existing work. New thought is
essential, yet, this considered alone, all truths and principles
set aside, results would be equally disastrous and lead
entirely to eccentricity, idiosyncrasy, and eventually to
demoralization as far as true artistic quality is concerned.

While talent and genius sometimes weigh measures,
apparently beyond reason, nevertheless there is some logic,
studied purposeful effort and self-discipline in the study and
practice of art. As George Eliott says: “Nothing will give
permanent success in any enterprise in life, except native
ability cultivated by honest and persevering effort. Genius is
often but the capacity for receiving and improving by
discipline.” Without at least some logic, discipline could
hardly be exercised. Reason and tradition guide natural
instincts, yet they must never encroach too far upon the
latter. The often-quoted touch of madness in genius is but
the throwing off of a possible over-influence of tradition and
conventions. The question is, how far can this be done and
art still fulfill its purpose?

Theoretically, acquired knowledge or the influence of
principles, should integrate as a part of natural ability,
become as one, so to speak. Actually, painting is a matter of
working between to two forces. It is doubtful if one could
continually work without now and then referring to the
authority of principles.

The study of paintings is important to the student.
Nothing aids him more than development of appreciation.
Real enjoyment of artistic merit is the greatest possible
incentive to its creation. Existing work also establishes
precedents and authenticates ideas or principles and fortifies
convictions. While art in individual examples of painting
transcends all governing influences, principles in turn,
transcend all schools of painting.

Outside of a few slight references, I have refrained from
mentioning trends in art. I think it is better to bring out and
stress the main essentials and their contributing factors —
those fundamentals which determine artistic quality —
rather than making an attempt to describe various schools of
artistic thought. When the student has acquired some
knowledge of principles, he can make his own analysis and
develop appreciation of works which are built upon these
fundamentals and not waste his time on others that have no
basis in elementary principles.

In study, theory or practice, knowledge is undoubtedly
the keynote to individual thought and originality in painting.

To those who are looking for suggestions which might
aid them in developing their own ideas, skill or appreciation,
this little volume is fraternally presented.


