Edgar Payne - Composition in Outdoor Painting

CHAPTER II
SELECTION AND COMPOSITION

SELECTION

Good composition is always determined by good
selection. Fine painting is a matter of proper taste and judg-
ment in choosing the motive, accepting some parts, discard-
ing others, and making changes or alterations throughout
the procedure.

Selection, like all factors in art, is difficult to define or
separate from the composite process in painting. Judgment
varies according to the subject, type of composition, and the
viewpoint of the painter. Selection is never the same in two
instances; a choice in one case would not do in another.
Therefore, in order to develop good taste and judgment in
selecting, it is necessary to develop the feeling for artistic
unity. If we can fully appreciate harmony in pictorial design,
we more easily select the parts and judge the measure of
influences that create it.

In painting outdoors the first consideration should be
does the view present a worthy motive? Is there quality that
exhilarates and lifts the mind beyond the mere making of a
picture?

A worthwhile idea, entirely separate from the mechanics
of painting, should precede each picture arrangement. If the
artist merely formed a plan for picturing a place or thing, art
would indeed suffer. Art has a deeper and more significant
meaning. It must touch the innermost depths of feeling from
which comes all esthetic enjoyment or appreciation.

William M. Chase admonished his students to develop
appreciation, have high ideals, select inspiring motives, paint
in a grand style, and never be satisfied with reaching for a
mere star but for the greatest one.

While it is necessary that the painter look for visual
qualities in nature, he needs also to sense attributes which are
beyond vision. The power is given to him to feel the mystery
and charm of fleeting clouds; the immensity and depth of
blue skies and atmospheric distances; the grace and rhythm
of living and expanding trees and other growths; the nobil-
ity, grandeur and strength of mighty peaks; the endless
movement and vitality of the sea and its forms. All these and
many more offer unlimited material for worthy ideas. The
motive selected should not include anything that disturbs the
complete ideology of beauty or pure esthetic pleasure.

In painting pictures, one needs to think of the esthetic
intent. Art has been used and abused all through the ages. It
has been employed to illustrate all manner of things far
removed from its actual purpose. Artistic quality is the goal,
it is never the story in the picture. The painter may choose
any subject he desires and make a fine work of it, technically
speaking. But will any subject fulfill all requirements of art?
While life or existence is a continual strife between ignoble
and noble motives, art is definitely on the side of spiritual
constructiveness.

One can hardly imagine a murder scene or the infliction
of bodily torture giving complete esthetic satisfaction. Of
course the outdoor painter is not concerned with such sub-
jects, but he is concerned with good taste in his selection and,
while nature has beauty in untold quantity, there are often
subjects or items that are undoubtedly unsuited or contain
discords that need to be rejected. Sentimental aspects, too,
must be shied away from. Such things as the moon, a freak-
ish rock, a waterfall, are items that may have more of a sen-
timental attraction than an artistic appeal.

Over-stressing dramatic effects is also liable to over-
shadow artistic quality. Often the influence of such effects
if handled well, may add to picturesqueness and command
immediate attention. Yet this alone will not create a fine
picture. Some of the more subtle qualities coming from anal-
ogous values or color and refinement in pigment handling is
needed to balance the strong vitality in dramatic contrasts.

In the millions of suitable subjects can be found an
ample field for study and practice without being tempted to
paint motives which might include a questionable note. Just
as much art can be injected in a pleasing subject as one that
is unpleasant or unworthy. There is much real beauty in trees,
streams, hill, mountains, rocks, boats, clouds, the sea,
buildings and hundreds of other subjects. Here is material
everlasting — material with inexhaustible artistic possibili-
ties. It only remains for the artist to qualify himself so that
he may choose wisely. Careful selection is needed not only in
type of subject but in the preliminary work and each stage of
painting as well.

When approaching nature for depiction the primary
consideration is the station point which will give the best
translation of the motive. To get a proper view and idea of
any subject, one should study it from several angles. The idea
is to locate the easel at a point which will reveal desirable
variations, not only of the size of masses but quality in line,
values and color.

The location of the easel should be in a position where
the shadowed parts and lighted areas will suggest the proper
measures, that is, the unequal distribution of light and dark.
(Plate VIII). It must be remembered, too, that shadows
change rapidly and if the work is not completed in time,
changing shadows may alter the entire arrangement.

When the sun is on the extreme right or left of the
painter, especially if it is low, light and dark areas are more
likely to be equally divided and, therefore, more difficult to
arrange. Although the latter situation may, in some
instances, give a proper inequality of values, in the average
landscape looking more nearly toward the sun or partly away
from it generally presents better arrangement of masses.

However, all of this is merely suggestion, as in the millions of
views to be seen almost any number can be found that are
not dependent on the direction of the sun, or on any
sunlight, for that matter. The point to be emphasized is, if
big simple masses are naturally presented, the composing is
simplified and made easier.

Beginners often make the mistake of selecting views that
would tax the ability of the more experienced artists. At one
time or another every noted painter learns the value of
simplicity in selecting. The sooner the student learns this
important fact the better off he is.

The experienced painter may be able to handle very
complicated views. However, if there be commandments to
the beginners, the first one should be that he select the
simple arrangements.

It takes very little of the view to make an extremely
large picture. Large simple masses are convincing; they
have distinct attraction and immediately call attention to
the picture.

Much study, practice and fine pictorial compositions
can be gained from a few masses, values, lines and color.
For instance, in marine painting, it is surprising how a large
rock, a cliff, and perhaps a small glimpse of sea can make
an imposing canvas. A large wave, few smaller ones, with
possibly a rock or two, and a bit of land is also enough to
create a fine picture. (Waugh and Smith on Plate V., Payne
and Dougherty on Plate IJ).

In landscape, two or three large trees are all one needs to
construct a powerful composition. A large mountain, a fore-
ground with a few objects such as trees or rocks, a bit of sky,
is material for the largest picture. Naturally, these are only a
few examples; thousands of other suggestions are to be seen
everywhere.

The compositions by C. L. A. Smith, William Wendt
and Maxfield Parrish on Plate III show the effectiveness of
large simple masses which produce a direct and immediate
appeal. So, too, do the striking arrangements of masses in
the designs by George Elmer Browne, Albert Ryder, and
Harry Vincent on Plate V.

It may be noted that all of the pictorial ideas by differ-
ent painters on Plates II, III, IV, V, and VI, show simplicity
in motives. Practically none of the pictures take in a broad
expanse of view. The two compositions of Turner on Plate II
encompass a fairly wide range, but even here the wide range
is only in the distance.

It may be noticed that each design, by the artists on the
above mentioned plates, has the most casual arrangement.
None of them appear forced or studio composed.

In all of the reproductions of paintings it may also
be observed that a broad simple organization of the masses
and spaces is evident. Even where there is much detail or
variation these do not disturb the bigness of the main
designs. All painters of note realize the importance of
simplicity in composition; the subordination of detail,
consideration for artistic principles and requirements as
well as a respect for outdoor form.

Nature offers all kinds of motives. Some are easily
adapted, others have to be simplified or altered. But this
is the business of the artist. Nature is not concerned with
invention though she does, at times, offer material for exer-
cising this faculty. In other instances she may present one
of those rare unusual arrangements that is really a gem,
standing out as a defiant challenge to the powers of
imagination or invention. This is the place where nature and
art coincide to a certain degree in the main design, yet, even
here, the artist must assert himself and utilize his individual
taste and judgment in treating the smaller items. A natural
composition needs just as much thought and effort as one
which requires alteration. Everyone must put something of
himself into his work. While nature furnishes the visual
motive, art comes from the depictor.

There is never a lack of material for selection. Nature is
always true and generous in presenting arrangements of
every description. It is up to the student to train himself to
recognize and accept a natural composition or choose one
that lends itself to alteration or simplification.

Part or all of any view may be accepted as is, or its areas
may be altered, parts discarded, or items introduced. Care,
however, should be used in selection or alteration. A scene
might require too much changing but the question may be
asked, how much is too much? The answer to this is that the
main masses or larger interest should require little or no
alteration, with only the less important items being altered,
rejected, or introduced.

The figure painter uses one or more figures as his main
forms and varies these only in the incidentals. The back-
grounds and other accessories may be almost anything and
arranged in any manner that will support the dominant
figure masses.

This principle is a safe one to preserve in painting
landscapes, marine, still life or any other subject. It is always
more satisfactory to introduce small items than it is to
discard or introduce extremely large objects.

Unusual personal quirks and mannerisms in brush work
alteration and adjustments are the things that produce the
finesse or charm of individuality. The main stem of the big
masses determines the general character of the design, but it
is the treatment of the smaller parts that clothes the picture
with the personality of the artist. It takes real ingenuity to
select, reject and arrange all parts so that the picture appears
both artistic and casual.

Learning to select and compose is largely a matter of
self-discipline. Therefore, if the student is apt to be over-
influenced by realism and is given entirely to seeking natural
composition, he should force himself to practice rearrange-
ment; while if he is inclined toward the other extreme of
disregarding nature, he should make it a practice to seek
natural compositions and study them closely.

Sometimes a scene may present material for several
pictures. (Plate VII.) For example the sky will reveal very
interesting cloud formations; hills present attractive
variations in shadows or wooded slopes; and the foregrounds
gcaceful masses of tree forms. All of these might have more
or less equal appeal.

Here is real confusion. The student must make his
choice as to what selection he will feature. If the clouded sky
is chosen, the horizon should be low. The foreground or any
other part of the picture may be dark or shadowed. If the
hills are selected, they should occupy a prominent part of the
canvas area, and the other parts should be treated in a manner 
that will not attract too much attention. If trees, foreground, 
or other parts are to be featured, all other areas
should yield dominance.

Often there is an instance where the view is crowded,
yet the painter desires to use most of what is seen. For
example the scene might reveal tall trees in the foreground
with a high wooded hill in the background. (Plate XII.)
To paint this as it appears might be confusing. The artist
must choose which part he will feature, the hill or the trees.
Nature might offer some help by casting a slight haze over
the distance, or a shadow over the foreground. Nevertheless
the problem still is the painter’s. He may lighten the distance
or darken the foreground masses; or, if the color of the
foliage on the trees permits he may lighten these and darken
the distance by cloud shadows. At any rate simplification of
such a view will be needed. It is most difficult to combine tall
trees and high hills in the background, particularly if the
values are closely related.

THE VIEW FINDER

Where there are several motives to be seen in one view,
the view finder will aid in selecting the most promising com-
position. This device also guides in the process of judging
values and holding the main masses or parts together in both
the view and picture. The view finder is made of a piece of
cardboard 6x8 or 8x10 inches, or larger or smaller, if desired.

rectangular opening is cut out in the center about the
shape or proportion of the sketch. The mat around this
opening should be two or more inches in width and painted
a medium warm gray. By holding this device at arm’s length
or nearer the eye, the motive my be separated from the rest of
the view. Color may also be studied to advantage by looking
through the view finder.

Several other artifices and practices may be used to
judge and maintain or hold together the main impression.
Whether indoors or outdoors most painters stand while
working. Now and then they walk backwards at the same
time squinting their eyes so that the view and picture will
resolve themselves into their largest masses. Reducing glasses
or mirrors are often an aid in selection and judging the com-
position. A large mirror placed opposite the easel in the stu-
dio is also a help in judging the relation of the parts to the
main unity. The picture is of course reversed, yet balance is
balance, whether it is seen normally or reversed.

The student may look at his work in reduced form,
reversed, sidewise, upside down, or in any other manner he
chooses as long as he correctly judges unification.

BALANCE

Balance is composing is not limited to the placing of
two or more large value areas on the canvas but calls for the
balancing of color, line, breadth and detail, and the influence
of the abstract factors or principles. (Abstract factors and
influences are discussed at length in Chapter I.)

In starting the actual arrangements on the canvas, the
placing of the horizon or other main lines and the largest
dark and light masses or spaces is the first consideration.
Then the secondary, tertiary and other masses may be placed
in whatever location gives the best balance. For instance, in
the steelyard type of arrangement, the largest mass may be
on either side of the canvas, the second largest mass on the
opposite side, while the third mass can be on or near the the-
oretical fulcrum, in the distance or the near foreground; the
smaller masses may then be placed at the painter’s discretion.

This, however, merely suggests one example; as a matter of
fact, all masses may be placed practically anywhere as long as
they form a pictorial balance or unification of the parts. The
main mass or its edges, however, should not be in the center
but in a place where the eye can definitely travel to distance
on one side or another. The main large mass may be in the
foreground, the secondary mass in the distance, or this order
may be reversed. (Plate XI).

Some painters suggest that before the start is made in
composing on the canvas two straight lines be lightly drawn
vertically and horizontally through the canvas center. (Plate
XII). These are, of course, temporary lines and are intended
to act as a guard to prevent equal spacing of the masses in
the composition. The area where the lines cross in the center
suggests a place or a “dead spot” around which all parts
revolve, through each part is located at various distances
from the exact canvas center. In most pictures this means not
only the center of the vertical and horizontal dimensions
but the figurative center between foreground and extreme
distance as well. Here is a slightly different problem than
vertical and horizontal equalization. Balance in distance is a
matter of creating an artistic inequality between the main
darks and light values, areas or spaces, rather than between
two or three near-related dark or medium values. The
balance for distance is also aided by color. When the fore-
ground colors are modified and repeated in the lighter
shades and grays of distance, their repetition always helps to
balance the composition.

The inclination is to think of only the canvas surface
and the first and second dimensions. However, while the
balance of the main masses in the near part of the picture
calls immediate attention to the work, a consideration for
balance in perspective adds charm and picturesqueness to
the whole composition

Full pictorial unity depends on an equilibrium in three
dimensions.

The more effort put into study and experimentation, the
less will be needed in painting the ultimate picture. However,
such study should not be along one groove. In order to
develop respect for nature, it is good practice to make some
rather truthful sketches. Then, to develop the inventive facul-
ties, others should be done from imagination. Another good
practice is to take the outdoor pencil sketches and vary them
in many different ways.

In preliminary pencil notes for the ultimate composition
on the canvas, the artist forms some idea of how much of the
influence of realism and invention he will use in his main
plan. With this once approximated, the subsequent work on
the canvas may be done with less conscious effort. While any
amount of effort may be put into the preliminary notes, the
actual work on the picture should go along without a hitch.
The less effort, the more pleasure and finer quality.

After all painting is a matter of relaxing to the pleasur-
able influences of imagination and emotional impulses.
During the making of preliminary sketches discipline is part
of the routine. Nature should be approached with this idea in
mind. Each sketching adventure, during the training period,
should be a disciplinary drill to key up the imagination,
appreciation and enthusiasm.

To get the most out of study, the student should look
upon each view or motive as a lesson to acquire knowledge
and develop all abilities. Starting out with the sole idea of
getting a picture presupposes effort to that end. This hints
that the student expects praise from friends — pure vain-
glory at the expense of artistic improvement.

Many artists repeatedly paint the same subject many
times, merely for the sake of practice. The French impres-
sionist, Monet, painted the same haystack twenty times from
one angle, then painted it twenty more times from another
angle. There is real perseverance, the stuff of which great
painters are made.

Depicting a single subject a number of times is a pretty
sure method of learning all about that subject as well as

being the best manner of resolving it into a fine pictorial
unity. Besides, the practice develops all facilities and creates
confidence and sureness. Real advancement generally comes
from studying and experimenting with one problem until
it is mastered.

Each worthy subject will bear much observation and
any number of pencil or even oil sketches either from the
same or several angles. As these are made, each becomes
better; some, perhaps the later ones, will be done “without
conscious effort.”

Instead of making several sketches, one may make
one with either pencil or paint, work out all problems by
deliberately using conscious effort, then set this aside and do
another of the same thing rapidly and with enthusiasm. The
spontaneity and freshness of the result will probably surprise
the painter. Little or no struggle will be evident in the final
sketch, for it is likely that there will be real vitality and
worthwhile quality.

The first sketch has familiarized the painter with the
main characteristics of the view. Study and practice have
given him confidence and sureness to do the last one in an
easy and natural manner. All have given him some valuable
knowledge of nature and aided all other facilities.

All artistic faculties should be kept alert by being
continually exercised. One means of doing this is to study
and paint, or compose many different kinds of subjects.
While almost every painter eventually confines himself to
one or two motives, it is well, at least part of the time, for
beginners to picture different subjects; then a natural liking
for certain types will develop of its own accord.

The outdoor sketches shown on Plate I show a variety
of motives. These sketches were selected at random from a
collection of about twelve hundred. In most of these, the
attention is given more to the literal aspect than to
rearrangement. Some artists use this method of making
sketches of the general truthfulness in nature, then employ
them as authentic data to guide the arranging of the ultimate
picture in the studio.

As each painter develops his abilities, he adopts
methods and chooses subjects suited to his liking and
temperament. Some artists paint large pictures outdoors,
some make sketches and reproduce them quite accurately,
others improvise considerably, and still others may make a
number of sketches of one subject, then consolidate them all
into the final picture.

The method or means of composing is unimportant so
long as artistic judgment is well developed and nature the
fundamental principles of selection, composition and of art
are respected.

COMPOSITION

Ruskin says, in as many words, that the great aim of
composition is to create unity and that one feature should be
the main interest and dominate all other interests or masses.
Practically all other writers on art agree that this is the main
principle in creating unified designs.

Pleasing design or a balanced pictorial plan is chief
among the requisites of all fine paintings. A picture needs
a solid foundation. We would not build a house without a
well thought out preliminary plan or a substantial footing in
the soil.

If a composition is to fill its first requirement, that of
attracting and holding the interest, it must embody those
elements which accomplish this end. If through carelessness
or lack of knowledge or practice, important factors have
been ignored, the feeling of unity or balance is destroyed, the
work is inevitably doomed to mediocrity.

Weak consideration of the main essentials is to court
disaster. Students, yes, even experienced artists, often become
interested in one or two factors and neglect others equally
important, thus injuring complete unity. Notable examples
of this may be seen in the work of certain painters of the
French Impressionist School. In their enthusiasm for color
and vibration they often neglected values, drawings and
unity in composition. Edges, too, were sometimes over-
softened in their eagerness to secure vibration. Thus not only
was truth and other essential factors set aside, but the main
unity was disorganized.

Nevertheless, the Impressionists’ idea of color vibration
and luminosity, being built on natural laws, was a sound
theory, and subsequently influenced nearly all schools of
painting. Not only was more attention paid to the truthful
aspects of nature, but the abstract principle came into its
own importance in the field of art. This is one more instance
of proof that natural laws are the basis of all principles, and
that new principles can never set aside existing or accepted
fundamentals.

Although impressionism is usually associated with the
spotty system of painting, it actually embraces many con-
temporary methods of depicting broadly. While the vibrating
of color with small dabs or bits of complementary color
produces fine quality, there is also great charm in broadly
conceived and painted canvases. Breadth in painting creates
an abstract interval that exercises the imaginative faculties of
both the painter and his appreciator.

The idea of breadth means simplicity. Simplicity means
one unified idea.

First bringing together the main masses in preliminary
plan, and maintaining this completeness throughout the
work is the sound principle.

Anyone gets into difficulties often enough without
attempting to compose with a poorly considered first plan.
Often the painter who has not gone into preliminary study of
his subject may find after the work is well under way that his
horizon is too much centered, a vertical edge or line divides
the canvas in half. Perhaps he has two points of interest,
several equal masses, or spaces — one or more of the many
errors that causes discord or spoils unity.

Usually, any attempts to reconstruct, to a large degree,
any composition after the process is far along will probably
be unsatisfactory if not entirely disastrous. True, many
experienced artists can do considerable reconstruction, even
paint an entirely new picture upon a freshly painted
disorganized one. Perhaps, in some cases it might be good
practice for anyone to occasionally do this. It will at least
develop ingenuity and show a determination not to admit
defeat.

Whatever advantages this may have, however, they are
not enough for the practice to become habitual.

Setting the stage for painting by thoroughly planning
the structure in preliminary notes is the best safeguard
against at least some difficulties.

Beginning with the main essentials arranged in fair
unity, one can overlook many small falsities or irrelevant
details that may appear in accidentals.

The idea in any composing is to get the work to a sense
of completion as soon as possible and then proceed with a
feeling that the work may be left off at any time. As a matter
of fact, many good pictures are ruined by constant striving
to make them better. Over-modeling and accenting detail or
highlights is an over-influence of realism.

There is always a place to stop painting. This is the
point where the maximum quality has been achieved. This
statement is easily enough made, but judging when this point
is reached is quite a different matter. Many artists have the
good sense to quite at the right time; others need to be told.
This gives rise to the old saying that it take two to make a
picture; one to do the work, the other to stop him before he
spoils it.

Some students mistakenly feel that the more work put
on a canvas the better it is. In some instances when the
painter works in a more or less methodical manner and
to a definite plan he may make a fine painting and improve
it by continued effort. However, the practice of painting in
a broad impressionistic manner is best brought out with
considerable preliminary planning, then painting the
picture rapidly.

A well-worked-out canvas in some hands has admirable
qualities, but the spontaneous vitality in work done more
freely and quickly also has a real worth-while quality.

Each artist develops a manner of selecting, composing
or painting that suits his temperament, yet nearly all take
advantage of artistic license. They gererally express the main
idea in a broad comprehensive way without sacrificing
artistic quality to nature. Nor does nature need to be
sacrificed to artistic purposes. There is no reason why the
characteristics of a particular object should be lost by slight
alterations of its contour, proportion or some modification
of its value, color or the changing of its location.

Naturally, unlimited alterations are not for the beginner
in his very first attempts in composing. Corot, Turner, East,
Wyant or Ranger might take great liberties and obtain fine
unity, while the same liberties in inexperienced hands would
produce the opposite results.

If one has the knowledge, ability and experience, he can
change or remove a tree, invent a path or road, or alter any
of the innumerable items without the change or addition
being obvious, or artistic quality lessened.

However, with all the possibilities of artistic leeway in
alteration or rearranging, the principle of unequal measures
is irrevocable. In any form of composition, the equal shapes
or sizes of masses is to be avoided as far as possible. Some
forms are difficult to change, for instance, architectural
measures are often equal. The thing to do here is to
disguiser the similarity in form by variety in value or color or
softened edges.

Long lines that parallel the sides of the canvas may
confuse with the frame, lead the eyes off the canvas area or
away from the main interest. (Plate IX). Parallel curves, too,
are often a discord. As example, the view may show a tree,
or group of them, with their tops rounded, above this,
the rounded contour of a hill; still farther away a cloud
with similar curvature. This condition calls for adjustment.
(Plate X).

The ragged or irregular contours of trees or other
growths is sometimes disturbing and may need simplifica-
tion. Another confusion might be trees where the masses of
foliage are about equal to the openings within boundaries of
the main form. Here the foliage should be more heavily
massed, or the openings should be enlarged, so that either
the masses or openings should definitely occupy the largest
part of the tree area.

In rare instances nature nay present trees nearly the
same distance apart or they may be set out at equal spacing.
Consequently several openings between the trunks might be
the same size. Here is a place where alteration is imperative.
One main opening must be created to draw the glance to
one exit and to keep it from being disturbed by trying to
go through two or three. (All items in the two preceding
paragraphs may be seen on Plate X).

In some cases where trees are rather close together on a
line, the composition will be more pleasing if the footing of
some of the trees is placed a little forward. (Plate IX).

HILLS AND MOUNTAINS

Extremely high ground elevations, such as hills and
mountains, often present other attractions than their physi-
cal shapes. The feeling of great height, bigness, nobility or
grandeur are additional qualities that may well be preserved.
Therefore, if hills or mountains are the main attraction, their
top contour should be placed near the upper edge of the
canvas, the horizon placed low, trees and other items in the
foreparts kept small and subordinated. Often, in pictures of
this kind, the middle distance will be covered with growths
which obscure the horizon. This has a tendency to destroy
the feeling of stability, or the height of the elevation. To
overcome this, some slight indication of a straight line on the
eye level or natural horizon may be used. (Plate XII).

If we decide to make a specialty of painting hill or
mountain subjects, we should study their characteristic
forms as the figure painter studies the human figure. Hills,
mountains, or any other subject for that matter, cannot be
successfully painted unless some knowledge of characteristic
formation is accumulated. Height is one of the strongest
points in hills or mountains. They are also massive and sug-
gest solidity and permanence. These characteristics should
be brought out when composing such subjects.

One other important thing to remember when compos-
ing hills and mountains is that form extends from their top
crests towards the painter as well as to the right and left of
their peaks. Picturing this foreshortening is not an easy mat-
ter. The ridges and canyons are generally irregular and their
form deceptive. Their general appearance is often like an
upright flat plane. The artist must use considerable ingenuity
to foreshorten form, arrange values and color to create reces-
sion in hill and mountain pictures.

When sketching outdoors, the location of the easel
should always be in a place where the mountain is mostly in
shadow or mostly in light. (Plate VIII). Equal measures are
particularly disastrous in this kind of subject. At times, too,
one may be compelled to alter shadows or other forms to
prevent equal spacing or monotonous repetition.

In composing hills and mountains, unity may depend on
an all over atmospheric condition, or the contrast of haze in
the distance, and strong foreground values; or still further, on
patterns of cloud shadows or those cast along canyons or
ridges. The treatment of all these factors will, of course,
depend on local condition, appearances and the painter’s
individual way of utilizing what he sees.

Preceding and transcending all visual appearances, how-
ever, are the great invisible qualities to be felt when viewing
hills and mountains — their nobility, height and grandeur —
those fine abstract qualities that exhilarate and lift the mind
even from visual appearances. When these abstract qualities
are successfully conveyed by visual quality in the picture, any
amount of study and work will be justified.

TREES

Trees are possibly used more in outdoor painting than
any other objects. Other motives may be seen and have their
claim, but trees will probably always hold first place.

Outside of their usefulness, trees are universally loved
for their beauty, grace and variety, both in nature and in pic-
tures. The variety in species, and again, variation in the same
species, together with the artist’s leeway, gives an unlimited
field for originality in picturing these growths. The feeling
that trees are living, growing and expanding things gives
beauty and rhythm to pictures. Texture, too, adds quality.
The semi-rigidness of trees is a good example of opposition
in material substance. The trunks and large limbs are
rigid and solid, while the leaves and twigs are fluffy and
have movement.

To paint trees well, we should know them well. Each
and every tree has its characteristics. These should be
studied. Some trees have very thickly massed foliage which
suggests compactness and solidity. Others have sparse foliage
with perhaps many openings between the leaves and twigs.
Certain species are tall and slender, some more “squatty”
or round in form. Aside from their shapes, texture and
local color, seasonal changes and atmosphere modify their
appearance.

The combination of heavily-massed tress relieved by
sparse foliage in places will give more variety than if the
latter is not included. (Wendt, Plate III). This applies as well
to the other way around. Oftentimes heavily massed foliage
will be seen in a group of trees. In order to create variety,
some part of these may be changed into more sparse or
scattered foliage, or in any event, the introduction of other
growths is always the right of the painter. While one is
generally guided to a degree, by the realistic aspect of trees,
it is well to keep in mind also that realism must always yield
to artistic unity and that artistic license is always at hand.

The placement of trees and other objects in the compo-
sition has great leeway, with only two restrictions: One is, the
rearrangement must appear casual; the other is that the
essential character of each selected large item be maintained.
Objects may be enlarged, reduced or their appearance
changed without creating disrespect for nature’s truths.

The average layman has a decided prejudice against
trees, the sails of boats, or other objects running off the top
of the canvas. This should have no bearing whatever on the
artist’s plan. Yet, in many cases with beginners, it does. Some
of them place trees or other forms just within the confines of
the picture area, often stunting their height in so doing.

The composition in all instances is only part of the view.
Therefore, objects or masses may run off the canvas on any
of its edges without hurting the artistic effect, all other
factors being harmonious.

Naturally, this presupposes the main mass or interest
should be well within the picture area, though if one tree or
a group is the chief attraction the bulk need not be entirely
on the canvas. On the other extreme, it is not well to deliber-
ately cause mass or objects to run off or “hug” the edges of
the picture. The principle to be respected is that all arrange-
ments must appear casual.

The whole idea is that the painter is not building some-
thing within a given picture area but translating a section of
the range of vision.

Pictorial composition should always suggest a natural
possibility.

CLOUDS AND MARINES

Of all outdoor motives, clouds and marines are the most
difficult to draw and paint. Since clouds and water forms are
constantly changing, there is not sufficient time for picturing.
In the average outdoor views, masses vary only in size or
appearance, while clouds and the sea not only change their
shape but their position as well. Changes occur even between
the glance and the mark on the surface. Therefore, the
main characteristics of these two motives have to be firmly
established in the mind, because depicting them is
practically a memory proposition, so that “must” is the work
to use when suggesting that the student learn typical forms of
clouds or sea.

Outside of the stationary land parts in cloud and sea
pictures, the painter has to depend largely on his invention
and imagination in arranging the moving parts.

Both cloud and sea subjects have, in most instances, the
extremes of texture in the rigid, solid or permanent nature of
ground forms as opposed by the parts that are liquid or
vaporish and moving. Contrasts are not generally in evidence
within the actual clouded sky area; shadowed parts on the
ground usually furnish opposition. In marines, the dark
extreme is generally the wet rocks.

Cloud views may range all the way from a dark stormy
appearance to extremely brilliant sunlit forms. Unless it is a
snow covered view, sunlit clouds in large masses present the
most luminous of outdoor aspects. Both values and colors
are limited in cloud views, although the latter is often evident
in sunsets. Contrasts of values within the sky areas are some-
what restricted, yet at times storm clouds may show rather
strong accents. Looking toward the sun also may reveal
rather abrupt contrasts, yet when extreme darks exist in
clouds it must be remembered that their substance is light,
vaporish and atmospheric and their general tone lighter than
ground parts, although there are instances when ground
areas are lighter than dark clouds.

A low horizon is usually the first thing to consider, if the
clouded sky is to be featured. The next thing to think about
is the division of the sky area. A decision is to be made of
just how much of the blue sky is to show (if it exists in the
view), and just what proportion of the clouds are to be uti-
lized. Here is where the law of unequal measures should be
invoked. The sky area must not be divided equally by blue
sky and clouds.

Since the subject here is clouds, they would naturally be
selected to dominate the picture. Their form should occupy
at least two-thirds, or even more, of the sky area of the can-
vas. Into this situation, though, enters another principle —
that of an isolated mass in the field of another value. The
main area may be mostly blue sky with small cloud forms
prominent enough to be the main attraction.

At any rate, the point to be brought out here is that
when clouds and blue sky appear in nearly equal proportion,
artistic license should be invoked and one or the other be
given the most space in the sky area. Although there is
really no limitation to the proportions, the sky area may have
only a small bit of blue sky or, on the other hand, only one
or two small clouds may exist on the large field of blue sky,
or the whole space may be either blue sky or clouds.

If clouds appear, usually they are the main or secondary
point of interest in sky area, though in pictures with large
overhead or sky spaces it is possible to have figures, trees or
other items as the chief attraction. These may sometimes be
effective if their parts are extended upward into extremely
light skies. (Borg, Plate V).

Cloud shadows, when cast upon the ground, are one of
the artist’s greatest aids in selection or composing. They can
be placed anywhere to suit the need of any unity. This is espe-
cially true if the cloud forms are moving rapidly, as the
chances are that all sections of the scene will be shadowed at
some time during the sketching period. With careful plan-
ning, beautiful patterns or design can be made by placing
cloud shadows in various locations on the landscape.

Clouds and their shadows make it possible to choose a
view looking away from the sun where otherwise there would
be little, if any, dark shades cast from objects or their parts.
Without cloud shadows, such views generally have a flat
appearance. This is not so good. Most compositions need
shaded parts of some sort to add variety and aid recession.
Cloud shadows then, contribute the needed quality.

There used to be a rule that wherever clouds are used in
the composition in considerable quantities, their shadows
should be placed on some part of the picture, and there is no
laudable reason why this rule cannot be applied today.

Cloud shadows add bigness or depth to most any view,
particularly those of great distances or heights.

Extreme brilliance in clouds presupposes that the land-
scape parts be treated partly or wholly in shadow. Sky lumi-
nosity generally invites accentuating. Since pigment is so
extremely limited, keeping the ground parts mainly in dark
values is practically the only method of bringing out the
sky brilliance.

By shadowing the ground, placing the horizon or land
contours low and keeping the proportions unequal are the
main postulates in cloud compositions.

In marine composition, the manner or style in painting
often has much to do with the arrangement of the parts.
For example, in most of the works of Frederick Waugh,
form is treated in a kind of plastic painting, the masses
being selected in a manner that will lend themselves to this
treatment. Even in his compositions that show only the main
body of sea water, the massiveness and weight of water
substance coincides with the handling of the pigment, while
on the other hand, the marines of Paul Dougherty and
William Ritschel show more of the softer vibrating qualities
of color and values. The two latter named painters often
produce fine qualities in bursting spray and moving foam
treated with closely related values and blending interspersed
with bits of color or light or dark accents. These light areas
are balanced by opposing darks in rocks which have vibra-
tion in color values and atmosphere.

The selection of parts of the marine view for the motive
is, of course, much like the selection of other views.
Whatever appeals as the most likely artistic interest should
be featured in the design. Since the eye sees the quickest
motion first, breaking waves and spray are often selected
for the point of interest. Usually this action is against the
darker rocks, offering possibly the greatest contrast, which
adds more interest to the movement. Sometimes the cliffs
or headlands present strong interest with the sea only an
accessory to balance these. Again, the main attraction may
be partly submerged rocks or slowly moving foam on the top
of boiling water, or it may be the surf pounding on the
beach. Whatever appeals should be brought out. Interest
need not be in the main masses. A particular spot, a small
mass, a bit of spray lightened by sunlight, a rock or headland
surrounded by light values, the pattern of foam, or any of the
hundreds of items that can be seen.

Some marine views present great activity or movement.
At the same time the water is predominantly green, gray blue
or other cooler shades that have little vitalizing significance.
Therefore it is up to the artist to keep the shades from being
too cold. He must utilize some form of vibration, if possible,
with warmer colors.

Many marine artists wash their canvas in with burnt
sienna or other reddish earth colors, then build upon this
with perhaps bits of this warm foundation showing through
the subsequent painting. Even though a coolish appearance
pervades the picture, some vibration or opposition is
needed. A cool color predominance in the view and working
upon a white or light gray canvas is liable to cause an
unsympathetic feel in the picture; that is, unless the painter is
experienced and is aware of this danger, and can by good
judgment in using his paint prevent such a condition.
However, regardless of how well anyone may use color in the
above manner, the fact remains that a warm foundation
creates vibration and more depth. It also holds the colors
together in better unification and produces a balance
between the warm and cool shades. Every argument and
unlimited precedent are in favor of a warm undercoat for
marines (or any other subject), and not one is against it.

The danger of coldness in any picture is something that
should be forestalled.

BOATS

Usually all subjects associated with the sea are called
marines; however boats are so distinct and interesting they
rightfully deserve a name of their own.

Compared to landscapes or pictures of structures, boats
are more changeable; that is, they may be sailing, drifting,
or their sails may be furled or hoisted. Then again, their
reflection in the water is generally moving. However, all of
this may make them more difficult to compose than a
landscape. At the same time there is an advantage, as their
mobility permits considerable leeway in arranging groups.
Although variety in arrangements is somewhat more limited
than other outdoor subjects, boats are more easily placed
than trees, rocks or structures.

Plate I shows a number of boat sketches. Others by
Brangwyn and Manet can be seen on Plate [V and Thiebault
on Plate II. Also, on Plate V are boat deigns by Albert Ryder,
Harry Vincent, George Elmer Brown; Thieme and Hanson
can be seen on Plate VI. A number of ideas or improvisations
may be seen on Plate XV, one each on Plate XIV and Plate
XX; two on Plate XVII, and three on Plate XIX.

MAIN INTEREST IN THE COMPOSITION

The placement of the main point of attraction in
composition is important. Regardless of its location on the
canvas or whether it is large or small, it needs balance by its
surrounding parts. If the main attraction area is small the
rest of the picture should not overcome it by presenting
similar or equal interest. The principal attraction should
not be placed too near the edge of the canvas. This may
cause abruptness and lead the glance out of the picture.
Points of interest need balance or easement by lesser attrac-
tions placed at distances in two or more directions. The main
interest is a sort of radial spot around which revolves the
other masses and the more temporary resting places of the
eye. (Plate XII).

At times the composition may be so arranged especially
in the circle, pyramid, group mass or pattern type, that the
main design will hold the interest and induce the proper
travel of the glance without one particular point being
stresses. A compact design with variety in the masses thus
creates both interest and harmony.

Unity is the goal and a small bit will often unite the
whole arrangement. A small dark note or contrast placed in
a strategic position will oftimes balance the surrounding
areas even it these areas are dark also.

Isolated small points of interest are very effective when
placed on fields of lighter values. For example, small boats
on a broad expanse of sea draws the attention immediately
though there might be even darker rocks or land formations
in the foreground. Small dark objects or figures may be
placed on a large foreground or middle distance covered with
snow or sand. The extreme distance, foreground or other
areas may be in dark masses, even darker than the small
items of interest, yet the latter will still hold the attention.

Where a small interest rests on a light field which is
partly or wholly surrounded by contrasting masses or lines,
some attachment of the interest should be directed to one
side or another. This may be in nearness or by having lines
or lesser masses placed between the small interest and the
surrounding parts. At any rate, the idea is to cause the glance
to move toward one section and not be confused by equal
spacing on either side of the chief small interest. Spaces
between masses and points of interest are to be considered as
well as masses or objects.

Special notes of interest like a house, barn, bridge, mill
or any structure, always adds to picturesqueness. Figures or
animals generally create a central point of interest also,
if they are included in the picture. One thing might be
remembered when these are used, and that is the glance of
the viewer usually follows toward the direction faced by
figures or animals. Therefore it is a good plan to have them
face toward the central part of the canvas, especially if they
are near its edge. While they are usually the main point of
attraction, figures or animals should never be forced out too
strongly, but should be well integrated into the design.

Figure or animal painting was developed long before the
landscape became recognized as a subject for pictorial work.
Landscapes were at first used only as a background for
figures. As time when on, more and more consideration was
given to picturing outdoor views. Some of the early painters
gave these equal prominence with figures. Even in this day
most European outdoor painters generally include small
figures or animals in their outdoor paintings. Constable,
Turner, Corot, East and others realized the value of bits of
animate nature in their outdoor paintings. Americans as a
rule are not so much given to this practice, although figures
of animals are often valuable in adding a note of especial
interest or in establishing scale.

DRAWING

The arranging of any parts for unity always depends on
capable artistic draughtsmanship, yet while artistic drawing
must respect fundamental accuracy, it does not demand
exactness. If art demanded only a precise and accurate copy
of nature, the camera could take the place of freehand
sketching. Work done with the camera may be considered
good drawing from a precision standpoint, but not from an
artistic viewpoint. The inaccuracy resulting from artistic
leeway, esthetic taste and judgment is what determines
quality in drawing in fine art.

Departure from the literal aspect, rather than mech-
anical exactness, is the code of the true artist. However,
departures are the result of studied intent rather than
inability. The average artist, if he chooses, could render an
exact drawing of what he sees. Artistic work not only allows
but demands some deviation from form and line. Just how
far this may go depends on the viewpoint of each painter.

In order to form a basis for study, we might classify
the approaches to composition, from the drawing
standpoint, into several categories. The mode of composi-
tion is generally influenced by the manner of drawing, and
vise versa.

One method of approach to creating unity in arrange-
ment to consider mainly the mass principle with full model-
ing and dimensional effects with a smaller consideration for
line. A second general approach is through a more decorative
treatment, with little or no regard for depth or modeling.
A third method could be more of the linear application and
less thought given to values, mass or recession. The variation
within and between each of these approaches and the
combination of two or more of them should about cover
the field; at least the classification gives a starting point
for study.

MASS PRINCIPLE

Practically all artists who write on painting in a broad
impressionistic manner stress the importance of thinking in
masses and the great quality to be derived from a simple
organization of the main areas.

A broad manner of composing or painting depends on
a broad impression of the view. Both this and the picture
should be observed with the eyes squinted, in order to create
the necessary “feel” for bigness in the main unity as well
as in the relation of the parts thereto. Also proportion, direc-
tion of line, values and color can be best approximated in
this manner.

The mass idea is conducive to holding the attention on
the picture as a whole. It creates an abstract interval between
the realistic detail of nature and a broad impression on the
canvas. This interval represents the artist’s ability to see
nature in a big way, to conceive large mass ideas, and paint
broadly with large brushes. A broad impression with little
detail is an abstract of nature.

The charm of broadly painted pictures lies in the fact
that the viewer must use his imagination; he then feels the
abstract impression as intended by the artist.

In placing mass arrangement we should think more in
terms of mass and form instead of lines. The “hold together”
quality by value, mass and space arrangement is important
here. Therefore the idea is to lose or disguise line and edges
in order that we can feel form in terms of shape or bulk
instead of outline.

A suggestive or sketchy drawing is the best base for
breadth in painting. This aids materially in developing the
facility to grasp the large aspects and translate them broadly.
It also helps to get away from the habit formed by many
students of drawing a rigid outline around each object, then
filling in these boundaries with color — an inartistic habit,
easily enough formed but difficult to get rid of.

One good idea to apply to any kind of drawing is to
make the preliminary marks very light — the surface barely
touched, a dot here and a broken line there made between the
greater measurements. At the same time it allows subsequent
correction and alteration to be made without erasure.
The mental concept of form is best held when light touches
are made between gestures. This practice also gives
confidence and assurance to the depictor. A sketchy sugges-
tive drawing for the base of painting induces more drawing
with the brush. Drawing should not be left off with the
compositional plan, but always considered up to the final
brush stroke. Another thing about the sketchily drawn base
for painting is that it gives more opportunity to exercise
invention as the work goes along. While it is advisable to
have the main plan well established in the mind, the smaller
parts are better left to be decided upon later. Small items are
beyond the limitation of memory; besides, there is always
charm in unexpected accidentals.

What is said here about the mass idea in composition is tak-
ing the extreme of this principle for illustration. It is not
intended to convey the thought that line has no part in the
plan or that the broad mass idea is the only method of
composing. Full unity in any kind of picture can hardly do
away with line or edge altogether. The mass principle in
arrangement merely calls for a maximum, not necessarily the
total disguise of edge or line. There might be danger of a
“woolly” condition or a sentimental appearance to the work
if the softening of edges or blending is carried too far. Some
accentuating of line or edge is needed in nearly all pictures.

Stressing mass arrangement and suppression of line
brings out the quality in the indefiniteness in the edge of
form, while contours or strong boundaries reveal the beauty,
grace, rhythm, proportion and other linear characteristics
of objects.

Thus we may seek to produce one desirable quality only
to find that in stressing one quality it overrides or destroys
another. This inevitably brings each problem back to a
solution by the individual.

In composing he may consider what particular quality
he aspires for, and utilize either line or mass, or both, to
attain this end. If he seeks the quality that comes from the
indefiniteness of form and edges, the artist must sacrifice at
least some line, and if he prefers the rhythmic flow of line in
patterns of line design, he is forced to lose some values in
form. If the painter desires to use the qualities that come
from both, it is up to him to decide the measure of each.

DECORATIVE APPROACH

The decorative type of painting is, of course, like all
other styles, difficult if not impossible to define in an exact
category, However, it is used here to denote those methods of
picturing which does not utilize much recession or modeling
but considers more of a flat mass design. The dependence is
mainly on grace and rhythm in line, variety in color, and less
interest on values.

Decorative painting may embrace conventionalized
form or adhere rather closely to nature. Sometimes a poster-
like manner with all areas flat and unbroken is used; or
again, these may be handled with each brush mark separated
by visible bits of the under painting. In this style, form may
have strong outlines filled in with spots of broken color, or
flat areas may be outlined strongly with lines all the same
width; like, for instance some of Brangwyn’s murals. The
edges of flat areas are sometimes softened, slight modeling
employed and some perspective used in certain styles of
decorative painting.

The decorative type of painting or composing is not
used extensively in easel pictures but rather more for murals
or panels intended for decorative purpose.

LINEAR DESIGN

In composing, and particularly in linear design, some
thought of the influence and significance of line is necessary.
Line may be placed in three general divisions: vertical,
horizontal, and slanting or curved. The vertical line is
emblematic of great height, stability and nobility. The
horizontal denotes repose and tranquility. The slanting or
curve indicates movement or activity and rhythm.

In order to create full unity, every composition should
have at least some indication of all types of lines. Often a
view will present many lines of one kind without proper
opposition support or interception. Unless these predomi-
nant lines are balanced they might create discord in the
unification. Too many straight upright lines with little or
no interference may produce a static, immobile feeling,
while a preponderance of lateral lines might destroy vitality;
and overabundance of curves could cause the glance to
travel too swiftly.

The term “straight line” is used here in its artistic
sense. It does not mean rule-straight line. An absolutely
straight line or a perfect circle represents the farthest depar-
ture from artistic drawing. Artistic straight lines are those
lines which run in a general straight direction without having
mechanical exactness; edges that are varied by softening
and accentuating.

Feeling will unconsciously react to the significance of
various types of line and the glance will unconsciously follow
the unbroken line. The principle of line influence is to create
balance and to cause the eye to wander slowly over the can-
vas, pausing temporarily on the main interest and less on the
smaller points. Therefore, lines need to be intercepted or bro-
ken to keep the glance from wandering out of the picture or
to places where it is not intended to go. Some excuse can
always be found to utilize line so that the eye will be held in
its proper course. By the same token, some interference of
line may be used to keep the glance from being too speedy.

The transitory line or imaginary pathway between
objects represents an abstract element in drawing. These
unseen pathways lead the glance across spaces between mass
or objects. Items may be place on or near the pathway to aid
in the eye travel. The transitory line contributes a distinct
quality to any type of composition.

The purely linear motive in composition need not be
limited to line drawing with pencil or charcoal. Oil paint
lends itself admirably. Some painters adopt the linear
principle in painting.

In this mode, beautiful contours and compound curves
may be interwound with straight lines into fine harmony.
In some forms of linear planning, a variety of grouped
lines may be created; also variety may be produced by
keeping some groups quite compact, while others may be
more loosely arranged. All over patterns may be made with
lines, either with or without a central point of interest.

One quality in all linear drawings might be kept in
mind, that is, compactness. All parts relate more easily if
connected by at least a few lines. Isolated parts are very
likely to detract if they have no attachment to the main
groups. The linear design may or may not embody consider-
able recession or line perspective.

Variation of the broad impressionistic, decorative and
linear modes of picturing are almost as great in number as
the artists who paint. The intention here is not to draw sharp
lines between modes of picturing or attempt to place all
manners of working in strict definition. The purpose is to
reduce the methods of approach to picturization to the least
numeration, in order that the student may decide his
leanings. Everyone has his likes and dislikes: some lean
toward one thing and some another. This is part of individ-
uality. No one can hope to paint or compose in every man-
ner. Originality is dependent on one general course.

PERSPECTIVE

Recession, or the feeling that the picture extends back
from the canvas surface, and the feeling that objects have
roundness are illusions essential to three-dimensional
painting. These illusions are accomplished by consideration
of and the utilization of several factors. Chief among these
are atmosphere, graduation of values, contrasts of tone
and color, the placing of dark and light masses and linear
perspective.

Though the painter does not need to adhere to exactness
in perspective like the architect, he does have to respect the
main principles of line recession.

In beginning the composition, the first consideration is
the location of the horizon or eye-level line on the canvas.
The station point of the painter generally determines its
placement. Normally, in picturing in level country, the
horizon would be placed low, although the artist may place
it most any reasonable distance from the top or bottom of
the canvas, provided it is not in the exact center. Some
painters suggest that one-third (of the canvas width) up from
the bottom edge is a good average for level country. However,
even three-fifths, probably, in many cases could hardly cause
a too-equal division.

Wherever the horizon is placed, this eye-level line is the
vanishing place of the diminution lines of objects on level
ground; also all spirit level perspective lines of architectural
structures, regardless of the elevation of the structure or the
station-point of the painter. (Plate XI). However, the lines of
diminution of objects and all lines that are not spirit-level
lines, such as roads, fences, etc., recede to points above
the slanting planes upon which they exist. Slanting planes in
this instance mean the slopes of hills, or rolling country.
(Plate XI).

If the artist is on a high elevation and the view is more
or less panoramic the horizon should be placed near the top
of the canvas or, in any event, no more that three-fifths
(entire canvas width) down from the top edge.

In outdoor views, that do not contain man-made
structures, the painter may place his horizon at almost any
place except the center, and merely assume he is on a certain
elevation. When structures with level lines exist, the horizon
must be placed to conform. Streets, buildings and even boats
have a way of dictating where the horizon shall be placed.

Occasionally the vanishing points of buildings may be
beyond the confines of the canvas. Here the artist must
employ judgment in disguising perspective lines, so the eye
will remain in the picture.

Outside of furnishing the quality of depth, perspective
is one means of diverting the glance momentarily from the
main interest and leading it to the distance and beyond which
represents infinity.

If the interest is in or near the foreground the glance
or feeling, figuratively speaking, travels to the distance
and back again the same as it travels from left to right and
vertically. There would be little need of the third dimension
indications if this were not so.

After the glance has rested temporarily on the main
interest, whether this is in the foreground masses or
grass in the near parts of the picture. The latter will stand
much more detail and a heavier modeling with pigment,
while the sky will need smoother painting. The method of
creating perspective by indicating foreground detail with
heavy painting and smooth painting in distance is rather
more of a general custom than an exceptional one. Many
painters have long realized the value and charm that comes
with this practice.

Often the foreground masses or their parts will be quite
dark against the sky or light distance, giving fine contrast,
and adding vitality to recession. However, this needs some
easement by a graduated series of values elsewhere in the pic-
ture which will lead more gently to distance.

Abrupt changes are not always confined to strong con-
trasts. On some occasions, especially in a panoramic view, a
lengthy horizon, either straight or undulating, may be seen.
This might present an abruptness without an in-between
value to ease the ground parts into the sky. In such cases, the
artist must perforce use his imagination. Perhaps a higher
station point may reveal a distant hazy hill or other object
which suggests a light mass value. (Plate XJ). If nothing
appears in the view that can be transferred to the place
of abruptness it is always the privilege of the artist to
introduce trees, shrubs or other items that conform to
local characteristics.

The top contours of mountains or hills often present
this kind of problem, particularly where the contour of
upper areas are rather dark in value. To relieve this, there
might be found aa more distant peak in lighter value or
perhaps growths may be placed or clouds may appear or be
introduced to relieve the abrupt edge. Instead of any of these
items the principle of lost and found treatment may be
invoked; that is, the edges may be softened considerably in
one place and accend in another. This applies to both the
horizon and hill contour. This edge-variation created its own
charm besides holding the glance in the picture and to the
rhythm of the design.

VALUES

Dark and light usually refers to the range of values in
the entire design while light and shade generally denote the
lighted and shaded parts of single items. Both light and dark
and light and shade are active factors in composition.

The primary elements of the tonal scale are dark light
and the halfway shade or half-tone. No modeling can be
made with less than these three. Only one-half of any solid,
rounded object may be seen or pictured from a given point.
The visual facets cannot be modeled with only two of these
primary shades. However, with the addition of the third,
modeling may be roughly indicated and by the use of other
intervening shades full picturization of the visual part of
form can be made.

The lighted parts of objects are modified by the light
cast upon them while the shaded parts are altered by the
absence of light. The halfway tone between these two shades
may be called the true value of the object.

Light always creates values. Even on cloudy days out of
doors there are always variations of shades in form.
Modeling may be discerned even in moonlight or twilight
in fact, if there is light enough to see, modeling and values
are always present.

Values have a decided attraction of their own, entirely
separate from color. This may often be seen in the photo-
graphic copies of paintings. These copies many times reveal
qualities which do not show in the original. One reason for
this is that values have a more massed appearance and the
main areas are more unified. Another reason is the deepest
dark in the painting may be much lighter than the darkest
pigment, yet it will show up black in the photograph, there-
fore causing much more contrast and vitality.

Tonality plays a considerable part in stimulating
emotions. Sharp contrasts of extreme dark and light cause
an agitated feeling, while the more closely related gradua-
tions produce a restful feeling. It is interesting, for instance,
to observe alternate black and white squares, like a chess-
board, projected by a stereopticon on a screen. The eye has
great difficulty in focusing on both values at the same time.
Another set may be projected in which the squares are both
nearly the same shade. Immediately more ease is felt; the eye
is kept more nearly to the same focus.

Contrasting color has the same reaction. The use of red
and green squares, or other opposite pairs, creates a sense of
considerable agitation; whereas, if a neutralizing agent is
used such as a dark or light tone or color, bringing the con-
trast in closer relationship, the excitation disappears. It seems
that a certain focal adjustment is needed to meet the speed of
travel of rays from both color and values.

The reaction from contrasts in values and color is what
creates vitality in pictorial work. The analogous values and
analogous colors produce the feeling of restfulness.

The key of the selected tonal scale on the palette is
determined by the modification of the darkest dark or the
lightest light. This key may be low, high, or within the
middle register.

The tonal scale in the picture is the basis for modeling,
therefore an important construction factor in building the
picture. We may, as an illustration of the value stem,
consider the picture built upon a foundation of values
ranging from the lowest dark to white, with various amounts
of color in each value.

Incidentally, it is well to consider the worth of one dark
for the whole picture. Neutral gray is preferable to black. The
neutral can be modified to suit any color scheme, then used
throughout the work in all the extreme darks as well as for
making lighter grays. The great advantage of one prepared
dark for the whole picture is that it will hold the color in
harmony and simplify painting. Mixing the extreme dark
and the light grays each time they are needed is not only
troublesome but often causes discord.

In considering any scale of values for painting, one fact
must be kept in mind and that is the great discrepancy
between the light out of doors and that of pigment. The
former may be as great as four hundred to one, while the
latter is only about fifty to one. This brings the extreme dark
and light shades closer in the picture. Consequently the near-
related shades are brought even closer together. This truth
can easily escape attention, yet it is important when reducing
the tonal scale relations and graduations on the canvas.
As example, we might say the dark of a tree trunk would
represent the lowest end of the tonal scale outdoors, the
darkest pigment may be forty degrees lighter than this; there-
fore, the painted tree trunk is forty degrees nearer the lighter
values of the tree in the picture. Carrying this idea further
into the higher valued areas, for instance, in clouds, the same
ratio would prevail here, the pigment representation would
bring the extreme light values forty degrees closer to the
extreme dark shades.

The influences of refraction also add to this bringing
together of close values. Modeling, accents and highlight for
these reasons are greatly affected. Although in the view,
accents or highlights may actually be contrasting and stand
out strongly, the student needs always to remind himself that
his full pigment scale is more limited than in nature and
working with only part of pigment scale restricts that much
more. Even though full scale in pigment is used the relation
of values within each mass in the picture must be very much
closer than those outdoors. Without consideration for these
facts, the student is likely to over-model or make his accents
and highlights too strong.

Almost any view, if it does not have atmosphere, may
have a considerable range of tone and full play of definite
sharp contrasts, accents, highlights and closely related
shades. Yet the painter may bring all of these nearer together
by limiting his scale toward the dark or light ends, or wholly
within the middle register. In a limited scale either the light
or dark saturates all values, thus bringing the whole into
more unity.

In order to aid in creating tonal harmony, many painters
work within a restricted tonal scale. To clarify this idea we
might say the full range of shades in pigment is ten points.
Corot made many of his pictures within a range of six to
nine points while Constable in some of his compositions
employed only the points from four to nine. Monet and oth-
ers of the Luminist School went ever further by using merely
two points of the scale. Frank Tenney Johnson, in his moon-
lights, employed not over three points and Childe Hassam
possibly used no more than this number.

The great range out of doors and the reduced pigment
scale creates a problem that often tests the ingenuity of the
painter. He must rely on taste and judgment in arranging the
sequences or graduations. Nature in most cases furnishes
suggestion for the tonal scale. For instance, the subject may
be in a very light key, a hazy aspect created by atmosphere
which brings up the dark and tones down the light; or per-
haps a brilliant sunlight with few shadows which might
appear extremely light. Both these instances may call for a
key near the white or light end of the scale. In other extreme
cases, such as the deep tone of a gloaming or moonlight,
the key may be held down near the dark end of tonal range.
Still again, the view may be best depicted with the full range
of the pigment scale. Whatever the view suggests, approxi-
mately true gradation, even though reduced from that of the
view, should prevail throughout the work, regardless of the
selected key.

Full picturization with dimensional and complete
modeling effects generally calls for the use of most shades in
any selection. As parts of the view recede to distance each
section needs its graduating general value, which brings
all values into closer relationship within each section and
nearer to the values of distance or sky parts. Generally the
darkest darks and the purest light are seen in the foreground
parts. At other times larger dark masses may be in the
distance or middle distance. Even then small dark accents,
darker than those in the distance, should be placed in
the foreground. Such accents add to perspective and
picturesqueness. Usually an excuse can be found to place
these dark notes in rocks, weeds, grass, or other items.

Every good composition contains three or four main
values. One of these masses is the darkest and one is the
lightest, while others are near half tone or indicated with the
intermediate shades. This does not necessarily mean that
these main darks and lights are first painted in the extreme of
the selected scale, as deeper accents and lighter highlights
within the larger areas will undoubtedly be needed. If the
main area values have first been approximated and placed,
the more subtle shades, modeling, darker accents and lighter
bits are more easily determined.

Aside from the relating of the tonal values, color must
be considered at the same time. On one hand, color may be
placed in a broken manner almost to the exclusion of gray,
and on the other extreme color may be saturated with gray
until it is almost nonexistent.

Pure tonal harmonies with subdued color have
undeniable charm. Whistler was a master at handling this
kind of harmony. No one can say that in his work he lacked
harmonious quality. Many painters work with a considerable
tendency toward a full gray saturation and achieve fine
harmony. However, the qualities crated by a heavy dominant
gray are always produced at the sacrifice of the vibration and
contrasts of the purer color.

INTERCHANGE

Interchange or the transition of one value into the field
of another is often the source of great charm in composition.
(Plate VII). This is especially true if one or both values
graduate from intermediate shades. Extreme shades always
appear more intense when they occur on or in close
proximity to their opposites. This is one instance where a
natural quality becomes an artistic quality.

Interchange may be a principal feature of composition
or it may be only a contributing quality. Cloud shadows on
parts of the landscape may be seen against light areas,
suggesting a strong contrast as the main motive for balance.
Large dark masses may have their footing on the medium
values of the foreground, then enter an extremely light sky
where they will appear more intense. Brilliant clouds might
occur in the sky area creating even more contrast. Views
looking toward the sun generally present opportunities for
extreme darks against a light sky area.

The reversal of the main masses may be considered a
form of the interchange principle. This means the main dark
masses may be transposed and occupy the same shape or
area of the dark. (Plate X).

Hills or mountains may graduate to extreme darks
against the sky. Light tree trunks, such as those of aspen,
birch or sycamore, generally present opportunity to observe
interchange. These often present an illusion of values
changing by contrast, especially if there are dark masses
existing beyond their lower parts and light sky behind the
upper forms. Again, the reversal of this may be observed; for
instance, dark trunks may rest on a snow-covered foreground
and appear lighter above.

After anyone has employed interchange, its occurrence
in nature becomes more readily apparent and its importance
in picturing is better realized. The play of light objects on
one field reaching over into a field of dark, and vice versa, is
generally taken advantage of by all schools of painting.
The interchange of values creates vitality and charm in
painting and should be accepted and used wherever an
excuse presents itself. Although perhaps less noticeable, the
abrupt contrast or interchange of color as well as its slower
transition by blending or graduation also contributes
to picturesqueness.

COLOR
Perhaps color might be called a non-essential factor in
composition, since unity may be created without it. However,
it adds very important quality and definitely aids in complete
pictorial unification. Without color any full representation
loses one of its main attractions.

Many ideas and theories of color have been presented.
The only theory that interests the student is the one that may
be of some help in learning color principles — ideas that may
be applied in a practical way in painting.

The red, yellow and blue theory seems to come nearer
to this purpose than any of the others, yet it has a fault
common to all spectrum ideas. Spectrum theories are
usually based on color light rays, while pigment is an opaque
material. Transparent color light rays may be overlapped,
producing secondaries which retain clarity. While in mixing
the pigment spectrum the secondaries are rather grayish or
lifeless in color, yet the spectrum idea nevertheless may add
materially in studying color principles.

Considering color in its primary parts, we have red,
yellow and blue. Taking equal parts of two primaries, we
create the secondaries — orange, green and purple. The
secondaries are complementary to the remaining primary; .
orange is complementary to blue, green to red and purple to
yellow.

If the red, yellow and blue are chromatically equalized
on the spectrum, one part of each, mixed together, should
make neutral. When opposites or complementaries are
mixed, they should make the same gray. However, the
proportions are different, as two parts of a secondary are
needed to one part of its opposing primary. For instance, if
to purple (which is one part red and one part blue) is added
one part yellow, equal proportions are the result.

Some consider color balance and color harmony the
same thing. Perhaps they are where color is used for some
purposes, but in pictorial representation it would be
difficult to employ balance of pure colors without some form
of modification. Balance with color means a balance
between opposites, or the primaries alone constitute one
form of balance.

This analysis is a scientific one, and since three equal
proportions of each primary does not approach a half-and-
half equality, this might be one place where a scientific
formula may be an artistic one. It may be possible to employ
these three portions to create color balance artistically, yet
colors balanced by pairs of opposites have greater leeway as
almost any proportion of each complement may be used.
Example: ten parts of purple to two parts of yellow, or vice
versa, or three blue and twelve orange. The more pure colors
are in balance of opposites the more vitality they create, the
more gray they become, the more feeling of repose.

Curiously enough, in nearly all picture work we seek the
tonal scale to achieve real harmony in color. True, analogous
pure colors can produce harmony. But it is seldom, if ever,
analogous pure colors only could be employed in painting,
therefore it may be said that only one method can be used in
creating harmony of color in pictorial work. Namely the
saturation of all colors used with a color, shade, tint or white.

Provided the principle of unequal measures is respected,
there is considerable leeway in both balance and harmony of
color for pictorial use. Balance may be achieved by a tiny bit
or large quantity of an opposite, or the saturation of one
shade, tint or white may be extremely light or extremely
heavy. In fact, one dominant tone or color may entirely
exclude any opposite; this is, of course harmony without
balance. However, balance by opposite color adds vitality,
interest and picturesqueness to any work.

A complete harmony and balance should have a well-
thought-out plan in the proportions of the opposites — an
artistic inequality of complementaries with a dominant
color, shade or tint throughout. For example, suppose we
take yellow and purple combination, use either of these as
the largest proportion, then mix a tint of yellow as the
dominating vehicle; this brings the purple and all other
colors used into the harmony of the yellow. On the other
hand, a purple tint may be used, bringing the yellow and
other colors to a purplish harmony. In both cases, harmony
and balance have been produced. Other opposites may be
employed, for example: greenish-yellow and purplish-red;
orange-yellow and purplish-blue; or any of the other oppo-
sites in the pure color circle.

Of course, if we study color in this manner it is neces-
sary to construct a color chart of experimentation. This is
not as difficult as it may appear. The circular form is praci-
cal. (See diagram page 90). The yellow may be made with
light cadmium yellow and a touch of medium cadmium yel-
low; the red with medium cadmium red and alizarin, the blue
with about three parts ultramarine blue, one part of
turquoise blue. To prove these, equal parts of the red, yellow
and blue should make neutral.

Now come the secondaries. To get the approximate
shade of green, equal parts of yellow and blue are used. The
orange is made of red and yellow, and the purple of equal
parts of red and blue. If the primaries balance, these second-
aries should be about right. However, as had been
stated, such mixtures lack clarity. To overcome this, these
secondaries may be remade to approximate the shade and
color of those made by the above mixtures. The green can be
created with viridian and a small bit of light cadmium
yellow; the purple with cobalt violet, alizarin and cobalt
blue; the orange with light cadmium red. If this set is
balanced and graduated properly, all colors will have clarity
and strength. The tertiaries and other intervening colors
in the pure color circle will have clearness also. The
experimenter may then mix, intermix, and graduate these in
each direction, carry them out as far as he cares to go.
He may add as many colors to the pure color circle as he
chooses, then create as many shades as he likes towards the
neutral. The tints towards white may also be great in number.

Naturally, the study of the spectrum involves consider-
able care. Certain graduations or proportions are to be
observed. One main rule is that the primaries and secondar-
ies balance. This may be proven first by mixing equal parts of
the primaries to make a neutral dark (which must be brought
up with white to judge its color), then two parts of a second-
ary should be mixed with one part of its primary opposite to
get the same neutral. The second rule is that the transitions
between colors in the pure color circle and between these to
neutral and white should be gradual, with no abruptness
anywhere on the chart. It is regretted that space here will
allow only a slight reference to spectrum experimentation.
However, there are many good books on color and the
serious student might well read every one of them.

There is no doubt that color theories will always be a
subject for debate. Yet there are undeniable truths about the
red, yellow and blue spectrum theory that may be used in a
practical way in painting pictures. If the experimenter can
learn one or several basic facts about color by making a color
chart and practicing with analogous and complementary col-
ors, any amount of time spent in such occupation is well
worth while.

Learning by experience to make a spectrum that
balances and a neutral that is really neutral gives some
valuable knowledge which is useful to anyone who paints
pictures. If the student can learn to classify the opposite
colors and reduce the contrast of complementaries by inject-
ing a small amount of one opposite into another, he has
learned a valuable principle. He probably will have learned
another great principle which is most important of all — that
is, a saturation with a modified color, a shade or white will
always hold any group of colors in harmony.

Previously mixing a large amount of dominant shade,
then injecting it in every color used is sometimes called the
“soup” method, but whatever name it is given it is a great
help not only in developing taste but in creating harmony.

Black is used a great deal in pictorial work but unfortu-
nately it does not have real affinity with color. A neutral
shade answers the purpose much better. True, an absolute
neutral is almost impossible to make. Yet a dark gray made
with Indian red, ultramarine blue and a portion of a yellow
added makes a very satisfactory dark for the palette. This
dark can be modified with other colors to suit the color
scheme or with white to suit the value scale.

The word “gray” as used here does not always mean one
made with pure neutral or black and white. A tan, brown or
russet may be called warm gray. Any shade may be said to be
gray when it contains more than one-half dark (neutral or
black) than color. Therefore a gray may be still gray and con-
tain considerable color. A gray may be warm, cool or lean
toward any color. There are thousands of grays, yet when we
realize that they can all be approximated with a dark, white
and the three primary colors, our method of producing the
various grays is simplified.

While it is possible to feature a pure color sensation
without considering grays, almost every well-known painter
uses grays in some form. Homer, Wyant, Ranger, Ryder,
Birge Harrison and a host of other artists employed a
saturation of one shade or tint.

One important thing to be thought of in painting
outdoor pictures is the very great difference in the color seen
outdoors and pigment on the canvas. Color in sunlight
outdoors may even be as great as two or three hundred times
more intense or brilliant than paint in pigment. Sometimes
outdoors it is actually the source of color rays. The writer
had the experience of seeing a red truck pass the studio
window. The reflection not only appeared first on one wall
but a second time on another. This gives some idea of the
great luminosity of sunlighted color as compared to pigment
indoors. It also shows the fallacy of attempting realism in
color rendition. In outdoor views strong brilliant colors are
not the rule but the exception.

When an extremely bright or intense color is seen and
the artist wishes to feature it he needs only to remember that
its strength or refraction covers a considerable area. It will
pervade other colors around it. Therefore some of the main
color should be included in the surrounding colors in order
to maintain harmony. Still life pictures that represent fabrics,
fruits or flowers generally need a different palette than out-
door views. The most brilliant colors may be used in such
compositions. Yet even here contrasts of brilliant color gen-
erally need a pervading shade to hold them together.

Striving for exactness in color, as it is seen in nature, is
often the source of difficulty for the beginner. Yet he should
realize several important points. The first is that not much
pure color exists outdoors, and the second is that when pure
color does exist no pigment on the canvas can come
anywhere near its intensity outdoors; third, any color combi-
nation in nature can be pictured with great leeway as the
individual colors are only relative in each harmony. Another
matter is that color is only one factor in painting. Values and
drawing should net be forgotten when concentrating on
color. Finally, efficiency in judging and using color does not
come readily or of its own accord. Much study, experimenta-
tion and experience is needed. Color, being visual, has some
advantage over other factors in art. While most of the
principles in painting are disguised, color and color
harmony can be definitely seen and studied in pictures, in the
spectrum and out of doors.

Unity in composing requires that attention be given to
all factors. The harmony of color, its brilliance or modifica-
tion should be in full agreement with the general quality,
rhythm and picturesqueness of the whole canvas.

THE PALETTE

The selection of colors for the palette is like many other
factors in painting — subject to the individual’s taste and
needs. The reason the spectrum idea is set forth here is it
gives laws or the basic principles of color. No other method
furnishes any authentic principles. Color is, without a doubt,
a scientific subject and has positive governing laws; therefore
we can learn these basic laws and use them to aid us in
developing our instinctive taste and judgment.

It is not necessary to employ the spectrum set of colors
on the palette; any set that fills the requirements of the
painter can be used. Naturally, he must choose pigments that
are permanent. The next important matter is a simple
palette; the fewer colors, the more easily they are controlled.
Those who like clarity in color generally keep away from
siennas, umbers and the more drab shades.

A good set of colors for the palette is light cadmium yel-
low, orange cadmium yellow, light and deep cadmium red,
viridian, ultramarine blue and Indian red. Although many
use zinc and lead whites, the new white made of zinc or other
light bodies and titanium appears to be the best of all.

Almost every painter uses a different set of colors. The
student should try many palettes in order that he can find
one suited to his particular mode and temperament.

RHYTHM

Rhythm comes mainly from a receptive state of mind,
which is usually brought about by what is seen and felt.
When viewing the various aspects of nature we find that
which coincides with our own moods, or this may be the
other way around: the scene may create the mood. To enjoy
nature and its depiction, the viewer needs to be in tune with
her. Being in tune does not mean that individuality is surren-
dered. This must be preserved if full and complete rhythm,
unity and enjoyment are to be realized. To feel the spirit of
nature is to feel the rhythmic, spiritual flow which encircles
animate and inanimate nature — the rhythm of life and
the universe.

Sometimes a view will reveal a lazy stream winding
through gently moving foliage, with distant meadows,
shadowless hills, all perhaps enveloped in hazy atmosphere.
Here is peace and quietude. We can relax, rest and enjoy what
we see and feel — suit our feelings to the occasion; the mood
of nature becomes our mood.

Opposite this mood are appearances which suggest
vitality, movement or liveliness. The air may be clear, the
sunlight brilliant, and color values contrasting. Clouds may
be drifting and their shadows moving across the landscape.
Another example might be the surging sea with its movement
— the slow-moving main body of water, and the more swift
action of the breaking surf. The contrasts of color and
values may also lend to the vitality.

Movement and strong contrasts call for some physical
reaction. The first scene demands little adjustment of the
vision, while the changing aspects of the two latter views call
for much visual activity; the focal adjustment of the eye must
constantly alter to see the contrasts of extremes and move-
ments. Rhythmic feeling when observing nature is caused by
seeing both the moving and stationary parts. In creating the
proper state of mind to feel rhythm, vision and appreciation
must be employed.

Nature has visual rhythm in form, line, color and move-
ment. The semi-stationary quality of substance in foliage is
balanced by the more rigid limbs and the strong foundation
in the attachment of the trunk in the ground. This accents
the grace and movement felt in the texture of loose foliage
and small twigs as they respond to the varying strength of
the breezes.

The symmetry in the banks of streams and slow or
swift-moving water gives an example of nature’s rhythm.
However, some movements of water may be too fast for
artistic purposes. Speed may be indicated up to a certain
point in pictorial work. Beyond this, we can only resort to
tricks which are likely to hinder artistic value. The swiftness
of cascades or waterfalls is too great to be suggested with
pigment. Besides, these are dangerously sentimental subjects
to tackle.

Whether the movement of clouds is seen or felt, there is
always a certain rhythmic quality in them. Though there is
less stability in airy cloud form than in any other outdoor
items, here is a fine example of the need for balancing of
moving impermanent masses by the more stationary
elements. Some of the more stationary ground parts are
essential. One would hardly paint cloud pictures with no part
of the landscape included.

Rhythm symbolizes harmony, activity, energy or move-
ment, yet it calls for a kind of solid footing as a balance —
like the fly-wheel of the steam engine — to hold movement
to proper speed. In art it needs some attachment to the more
stabilizing elements to create an artistic visual unity.

While rhythm is far-reaching and involves many influ-
ences apart from the mechanics of painting, the immediate
problem is to arrange the visual factors so the attention will
be within the confines of the canvas, which, in this instance,
is the source of rhythmic feeling.

Rhythm may be said to be the lubricating element in
pictorial composition. A sort of easy co-ordination of time
and circumstances is needed to relax the mind in order to
sense nobility and visual quality in nature and relate this in
the visual parts on the canvas. The artist must first respond
to impulses and appreciation before he can successfully
convey the feeling of rhythm. As the dancer uses rhythm to
integrate time, space and movement, so too, does the painter
utilize this element to integrate the factors in art.

Rhythm being an attribute of music, is felt in the
recurrence of similar sounds, contrasts and subtle nuances of
near tones. Poetry, too, must have rhythm. In languages, also,
this quality may be felt; for instance, Spanish has beautiful
undulation and repetition — a continuity of certain near
evenness, broken or interspersed with the contrasts of
climaxes and anti-climaxes.

Beyond all this there is an elemental need for rhythmic
influences. At the basis of all art are primitive, emotional
instincts which include a natural inclination for rhythm.
Regardless of what heights we attain in culture or creative
work, all attributes in these can be felt only through some
instinct that is inherent in all from the time of Adam. To suc-
ceed, then, we must not look for new powers, only cultivate
or expand those which are given us. Any new ideas or idio-
syncracies about art that are acquired are useless unless they
appeal to primitive emotional impulses.

Harold Speed, in his excellent book on drawing, says in
as many words that in the works of primitive man may be
seen a direct emotional feeling for rhythm, and that art
receives its highest excellence when primitive instincts
agreeably balance naturalism with conventionalism. History
bears this out. In a modern materialistic age, conventions,
literalism or realism sometimes over-influences the finer
quality coming from inherent naturalness. Realism,
conventions and scientific laws have their place in the study
of art, yet any ideas that are based on them must embrace
principles which integrate easily with primitive naturalness.
This equalization creates ideal or standard for guidance in
artistic work.

Naturalness and ease in depiction should always
transcend any over-influence of conventions. The abstraction
of the mind from over-influence of any acquired knowledge
should be almost complete. Some consideration for a near
approach to this mental status is essential if the proper union
between the mental or emotional nearness to the hand is
made and the rhythmic quality is to be felt in the picture.
Skill in handling pigment is necessary to create the rhythmic
feeling. The movements of the hand in painting should be
graceful, confident and direct.

Painting is like handwriting — the grace and swing in
curves, ovals, and the general rhythm in the line of written
words is possible only when the hand easily and confidently
makes the strokes.

The significance of line has much to do with rhythm in
painting. The right angle conjunction of straight line has less
grace than when the connection is less abrupt. Lengthy
vertical and horizontal straight lines not opposed or
interrupted are always more or less static.

Curved lines contribute more to rhythmic feeling than
any other type of line. Yet curved line generally needs
opposition by at least a few straight lines.

A predominance of curved or slanting lines might have
a great degree of movement, yet there is such a thing as too
much. Some upright and lateral straight lines are usually
needed in such an instance to slow the too speedy glance.

The recurrence of contrasts, accents, extreme values or
color, the repetitions of closely-related values and color are
also some of the visual factors in the picture which cause
rhythmic feeling.

At times the edges of mass or lines within the mass may
coincide with lines in other areas beyond the intervening
spaces. This usually adds to the rhythmic quality. The
blending or softening of edges in some places also helps by
easily merging of one area with another. The transitory line,
or the imaginary pathway between objects or contrasts, is
another aid in creating the feeling of rhythm. This implied
route for the travel of the eye often leads from on near-
related part to another. The transitory line adds a fine
abstract quality to the more visual factors.

Visual rhythm lays no claim of origin in one single
factor but is closely related to all factual elements of art
as well as the more remote yet important abstract
influences.

REPETITION

Repetition, strictly speaking, means regularity of
parallel lines, similar proportions, or sameness in values
or color, yet in painting it demands variety in the recurrence
of each item. Unequal measures or quantities in all parts are
needed to create artistic unity.

When the eye is properly focused on one element or
measure, it craves something of the same nature as the next
landing place. Responding to a natural law of vision, the eye
first sees points of special interest, the largest dark or light
mass or the greatest area of pure or nearly pure color. The
eye then travels to the next in importance, a dark or light, the
nearest value or proportion of mass, or the closest color.
(Plate XII). Not that it is relevant, but the eye also first sees
the fastest motion.

If the size of areas are agreeably varied, and color of
values modified in the secondary, tertiary, or still other
places, repetition will be balanced by variety, whereas if
masses are similar in size, color and values, have too much
sameness and monotony, the opposite of artistic quality will
be the result.

Variety and contrasts are needed to balance evenness of
values, color, or other repetitions in order to resist a too-swift
flow of the glance. Variety and contrasts are, in turn, held in
harmony by repeated measures in various proportions; thus
repetition furnishes the links in the unification of extremes.

In composing, both extreme dark and light main areas
need to be repeated elsewhere, either in smaller proportion of
mass of the same value, or modified slightly.

If a pure or nearly pure color exists in a considerable
area, it calls for a smaller proportion or modification in
other places. These repetitions of color may be a matter of
vibration in “spottings” of color, or the color may be
thoroughly mixed into a gray. For instance, nearly all of the
canvas may be in medium or light gray values with one area
of pure or nearly pure color as the dominant attraction. Such
a plan offers a chance for excellent balance and
harmony. A large, medium or even small area of color on a
gray field will always attract and hold the attention.
However, this kind of arrangement needs repetition of color
as well as any other harmony. Although it may be scarcely
apparent, the gray field should have enough of the main
color to hold the picture together from the color standpoint.

Repetition of color has, perhaps, more leeway than
line, values, or proportion of mass. Apparently there is no
limitation to the repetition of one color in a given picture, as
it can be employed with less and less of the other colors until
the work can become purely a monochrome with variety only
in the proportion of mass and in values.
