Edgar Payne - Composition in Outdoor Painting

ADDENDA

By EVELYN PAYNE HATCHER

It is clear from the material he left that my father had planned to
include sections on the steps involved in his methods, on the use of
color, and on painting in tempera. Some of his color illustrations have
been preserved, and with the opportunity to add color reproductions,
we put these into some kind of order with some reproductions of
his work. In this edition, I have added a few other items, including
some of my mother’s lessons and works that seem to clarify and enrich
his text, as well as a number of his finished painting that put it
all together.

My parents shared many basic attitudes towards art, although
their styles were very different. My mother was a good teacher, artic-
ulate and well organized in terms of preparing lessons on the basic
principles. My father found teaching difficult, and did not take stu-
dents until the Great Depression. He taught by demonstration, and
took students outdoors and made suggestions to them individually.
Both of my parents expressed exasperation with beginners who
expected to go out on one or two sketching trips and come back with
finished works of art; it was the process, the learning, even the strug-
gle that was to them more important that the product. My father con-
sidered his color sketches made in the field as studies for his own use;
he did not sign or sell them as a rule, although many are highly
regarded today.

A favorite story about my dad is the account of a time when he
was out sketching, far from any sign of habitation. He was surprised
to find a man behind him, watching. Then the man said, “Why, that’s
nuthin’ but puttin’ on daubs!” A little later the man shook his head
and said, “But you sure gotta know where to put them daubs!” and
walked away.

METHODS

Learning where to put them daubs is what his book is all about.
It was interesting to see all the study that went into any subject that my
father painted. He worked with anatomy of horses, although he rarely
painted them in a detailed way. He sketched the rigging of various
types of fishing boats, and made a detailed scale model of a Breton
fishing yawl, yet if a pulley appeared at all in a finished work, it was
not more than one of those daubs. Examples from his notebooks
show that sometimes the sketches are studies in the shape or the struc-
ture of his subjects, sometimes they are thoughts as to the ways the
subjects could be arranged to make an interest composition. He
always has a small notebook in his kit, and often one in his pocket,
along with a short 6B pencil. (See opposite, and p. 61).

Sensitivity to the natural world meant that composition was not
only a matter of good design in the abstract sense, but involved the
knowledge of the subject so that the composition would bring out its
characteristic qualities and the feeling of the scene. Trees provide an
example; the detailed anatomy of trees is involved in appropriate com-
position, and he made many studies of trees both in pencil and color.

PERSPECTIVE

When houses and buildings are included in a landscape, a knowl-
edge of linear perspective is necessary (p. 70). It is often not realized
that the same principles apply to natural landscape, for example, shadows on the ground must fall so that they lie in the directions of the
vanishing point. (See also Plate XI, p. 97).

Color perspective involves both hue and value (p. 72) The paint-
ing of the Grand Canyon (CPSB) shows a bold use of color perspec-
tive that gives not only a sense of distance but of depth. It is the use
of color that enabled him to show mountains and cliffs that are soft-
ened by distance and atmosphere, and yet retain their solidity and
structure. Studies of rock formations for structure of course played a
part (CP-10D).

The scale of values is also important in dealing with “the colors
seen outdoors and the pigment of canvas” (p. 94). In order to give light
to the sky or sunlit areas, for example, the darks of the foreground are
painted with colors much darker than the eye sees. It is this relation-
ship of dark to light that permits harmonizing modifications of bright
areas to get atmosphere and depth of field (CP-10F).

My parents, who used similar palettes and shared many ideas
about art, had very different styles. And some of their teachings show
differences in approach. My mother’s way of drawing was often very
different from the sketchy way practiced and recommended by my
father. She constructed shapes, and had a great sense of the solidity of
forms. After all, she came to easel painting from commercial art, hav-
ing been nationally recognized for her billboard designs, while my
father came from a career as a scene painter in the theater.

For example, my father said (p. 64): “It...helps to get away from
the habit formed by many students of drawing an outline around each
subject, then filling the boundaries with color — an inartistic habit.”

Yet I noticed that Mother sometimes filled in the outlines, and
there are styles that to a large extent depend on line and local color, as
in many Japanese ukiyo-e prints. But Mother’s preferred subjects were
people and human surroundings, while he portrayed light and air and
great distances, And, of course, at that point he was writing about cre-
ating a good composition, not on drawing an object. That he recog-
nized the worth of other styles can be seen from his remarks on deco-
rative style (p. 65).

Mother experimented with many media and styles. She like
opaque watercolor (gouache) for outdoor sketching, as it dries quickly
and one can add to the composition by drawing items with a brush
over existing work. In this case she drew rapidly and sketchily. Plein
aire painters seldom paint larger works in the field, because the light
often changes too rapidly. Sometimes as in early morning and near
sundown, very rapidly indeed. One suspects that Dad’s oil sketches
were done in less than half an hour.

While the basic principles of composition remain the same, dif-
ferent mediums are often quite different in technique, especially when
opaque paint such as oil of gouache is compared to a transparent
medium such as wash watercolor.

A statement that recurs in the first chapter is that knowledge
must precede execution. I’m sure he did not mean book knowledge
primarily; he meant that one should learn to see artistically by draw-
ing and by experiment before trying to produce a finished work of art.

It is interesting to learn how many different ways there are to
approach the process of drawing. One has to adapt one’s method to
the subject, the medium, as well as one’s own preferences (p. 62). Dad
planned compositions with pencil drawings and so was able to paint
rapidly at the easel without laboring over layout. This book grew out
of those many thoughtful evenings.

Both my parents insisted that practice in drawing from nature
teaches one to really see, which is rewarding in itself. The more you
draw what you see, the more you see. And only those who can draw
well can modify or distort the image effectively for an artistic purpose.


STEPS IN THE PAINTING PROCESS

The first step in his method was to select and arrange the ele-
ments of the scene he wished to use (Chapter I). When he had
decided what the main subject was to be: trees, sky, hills, water, etc., he
then tried out differing compositions. (Plates VII to X). He did not
draw many of these when working outdoors sketching, but went
through the process mentally. In planning studio paintings he made
many pencil sketches, often in the evening, trying out different compo-
sitions and planning the next day’s painting.


In the field he sometimes used a little 
cardboard frame to view a part of the 
scene and to help select and visualize
the composition.

Either in the field or in the studio, the second step was to draw
the scene on canvas with charcoal, sometimes very sketchily, some-
times in some detail, depending on the subject, with indications of
darker areas.

The third step was to establish the pattern of darks and lights
(values) by painting a wash or stain (often thin red ochre) over the
dark or shadowed areas (CP-9A and CP-9B).

Fourth, working all over the canvas, he used thin paint to estab-
lish the color scheme (CP-9D).

Fifth, thicker pigment was applied to the dark areas in hues that
would be appropriate for the shadowed places — for example the dark
trees in CP-9D. Then applying heavier paint, he gave attention to the
solidity of forms, “modeling,” (p. 78). He worked to some extent from
dark to light, as is traditional in oil painting, but also tended to work
all over the canvas to maintain the relationships between dark and
light, warm and cool, in accordance with the color scheme he had in
mind, leaving only the highlights for the last.

The steps outlined above were those used for oil painting, but he
followed very similar procedures when he worked in opaque water-
color (tempera), which is rather unusual. In both he often covered the
whole work with wash or stain in transparent color (CP-9F) and
added the opaque color in daubs as in oil painting. The underlying
color often showed in small areas between daubs, giving vibrancy to
the finished work. At times he used a colored paper to give this effect
(CP-9C and CP-10A).

When I was told that many copies of this book are assigned by
art teachers, I began to think about using it as a teacher, or how I
would see it as a student. When one is learning, especially at first, there
are so many aspects of painting that one is trying to remember that it
can be discouraging because the results do not come out as one had
hoped. My mother’s lessons on basic principles kept occurring to me
and I thought that dealing with one aspect at a time, as she had her
students do in a series of exercises, would be a great help. Then when
one is before a scene to be painted, these aspects can be tackled in
some kind of order, instead of chasing each other around in one’s
head.

My father discusses the importance of the basic principles
(pp. 5-8) but mother analyzed them and spelled them out for begin-
ners. Here I have selected a few that directly relate to the material that
has gone before in this volume. The material [ am drawing on is in a
folder with some of her notes and plans to do a book, and some of the
illustrations were probably done by students, as it was her habit to set
the problem and let them work it out. The rest is what I remember, or
in some cases, what I have learned from my own work.

In the examples below you can see how Dad laid out the darks
and lights of the composition as he was drawing it. He was aware of
grades of dark and light all along while most beginners think first in
terms of local color.

One of the exercises Mother used called for learning to make
compositions with black, white and grey only. She thought that even
persons of considerable experience would benefit from exercises that
help one to see in these terms.

In one exercise, she had the students paint strips of black, white,
and grey in varying proportions and varying orders, then add land-
scape touches to half of the strips.

Dad’s use of the word “line” applies usually to the structural
lines of composition, not to the quality of individual pencil or char-
coal lines. But the soft 6B pencil he used gave great variety to the lines
in his composition drawings, qualities that do not show in the illustra-
tion in the text.

Compositions can be analyzed in different ways. I am sometimes
surprised at the way some great work of art is diagrammed in an art
history book, as I had seen the patterns somewhat differently.

Two main schemes can be combined. For example, the simple
basic of the power of thirds often can be seen in other patterns. This
can sometimes serve as a test of the layout, and help one to judge the
effect. Not that in a great many of the types shown in the drawings
above, the focal points are a third of the distance from an edge.

COLOR

In the text he advocates preparing one’s own spectrum for the
knowledge one gains. Standard color wheels are easy to find in books,
but there is no substitute for making one’s own. (p. 88ff).

For a long time I found it difficult to understand the terminology
of color, so I offer some definitions here: Hue is what is usually called
“color”; the blueness or redness or greenness of a color. Hue may be
thought of as the position of color in a pure color circle. He does not use
the term “hue” because he felt the meaning clear enough without this
technical term. Intensity is sometimes called “purity” or “saturation”. It
refers to the brilliance or clarity of a color. “Saturation” is, however,
sometimes used with reference to mixture, as on page 88. Shade is used
in the color circle (p. 90) to indicate a mix of a hue with its complement,
to make it less intense, more neutral. But “shade” is sometimes differ-
ently used to mean areas in shadow — these are dark in value but not
necessarily neutral in hue. Sometimes “a shade” is even used to mean a
hue, so the meaning depends on context. Value refers to lightness or
darkness (p. 78). A black and white photograph depends on a scale of
values. Tint is used to indicate the lightening of the value of a color (hue)
with white, and thus refers to a light color.

Once one has a complete, home-made color chart, one can experi-
ment with color combinations. Color experiments using basic ideas, one
or two at a time, are recommended in the short section of color, and sug-
gested by the color illustrations CP-2 and CP-3. Certainly he also exper-
imented for his own use.

An exercise that is now often assigned in color theory classes
involves making a multiplication table grid of perhaps 25 or more
squares. With a single hue one makes gradations of shade in one dimen-
sion, and gradations of value along the other. This really brings home
the enormous variation possible.

An interesting experiment with the “soup” method (p. 92) can be
done by drawing a series of small sketches of the same scene, all very
much alike. Color is applied to the first just as it comes from the tube,
naive style; blue sky, green trees, red roof, yellow flowers and the like. The
second is painted with the same colors to which white has been added.
For the third, a “soup” is made with yellow and white and added to each
and every color used. Soup for subsequent sketches is made with blue,
red, green and so forth, each with white, one at a time.

Students of Asiatic art have noted the importance of “negative”
or “empty” space in Chinese landscape painting. The misty featureless
area that lies between the foreground and the mountains is analogous to
silence and evokes the mystic and the spiritual.

In Canyon de Chelly, I find this quality in the view through the
opening to which the eye is led by every aspect of the composition.
