Edgar Payne - Composition in Outdoor Painting

CHAPTER IV
CONCLUSION

A main objective in the art of painting is to disguise,
insofar as possible, the use of methods or the influence
of principles.

This concealment creates, so to speak, a great mystery
— an attractiveness, unseen and indescribable. This abstract
quality is the element that places pictorial work in the realm
of fine art. The purpose here is not to attempt to define this
quality or to infer that it can be directly sought or created.
The object is rather to describe the factors or principles and
influences from which artistic quality arises.

In recent times some trends in art almost entirely
disregard principles. Yet only time will tell whether this is a
wise procedure or not. This much may be said, however,
without principles it is doubtful if any real worthwhile
instruction can be given or any skill or appreciation
developed. The foundation for study and practice of any
worthy creative work can only be built upon principles; there
is nothing else that will take their place.

True art of the past has been built by the guidance of
these essentials. The worthwhile art of the future will
undoubtedly be produced in the same manner.

Underlying all fine art are sound principles. The basis of
all principles are sound ideas. The main ideas or major
principles of art cannot be reiterated too often.

In order that the principles of each basic idea will
crystallize in the mind every fundamental of art should be set
forth frequently.

Throughout this treatise several ideas have been
repeated perhaps many times. It is well to remember that
only by repeated statements can ideas be grasped and
retained. In study and practice, we must not only have
new ideas but continually refer to existing main ideas or
principles. Many times each day during the painter’s career,
he will either consciously or subconsciously be reminded
of principles.

The fact that each painter may have his individual
translation of a principle does not lessen its value. Often
diverging viewpoints may stimulate entirely new ideas, or aid
in fortifying each artist’s personal convictions.

As a matter of fact, opposite beliefs is one of the main
influences in creating originality. Each artist has his own
convictions and should always be prepared to defend
them. Building up a personal viewpoint is one of the first
things to do in the study and practice of art. Sooner or later
every student must be decided in his views, at least to a
reasonable extent. Everyone needs to be decisive enough to
have independent judgment in forming concepts and
building compositions.

While a student may alter his ideas, or even his style in
painting, he still must have courage in his convictions. He
cannot change to suit every idea that comes along.

The quality achieved in any work must, in the last
analysis, depend on the ideas and efforts of the student
himself and the goal he has set. He is master of his own
destiny as far as accomplishment in art is concerned.

Learning the art of painting is not an easy task. It
takes a great deal of intelligence, keen analysis, study and
practice. Even with this, there is never a full understanding
of all factors or elements, nor is practice ever entirely
satisfactory.

Since the approach to art is through a roundabout path,
no doubt its first study is always confusing. To make the
matter more difficult, the beginner generally cherishes
praise from friends, who, as a rule, know nothing whatever
of art or its requirements. Early attempts at picturization
usually develop a certain ego or pride, which is hard to set
aside when the student is confronted with the study of real
artistic essentials.

Changing the viewpoint under such circumstances
is one of the most difficult of problems for both the
student and his advisors. Ironically enough, the beginner
can never see or realize the most important thing he
should remember, that is, a simple, naive manner of
approach to both study and picturization must always be
fostered. He generally wants to put this aside and use what
he learns to paint pictures.

Here begins an equally difficult problem, that of
developing and expanding this naturalness into artistic
expression. The matter of getting the beginner to use
suggestions for training and disciplining himself rather
than using them as rules for building pictures is one of the
problems that is yet unsolved.

Some who study art are not interested in adding to
the institution of art in a large sense; they merely study
and practice in a semi-amateurish way for their own
personal enjoyment. This type of student presents the
greatest difficulty. He usually wants to be shown how to
paint a picture. Therefore, the only thing to be done is
to aid by making suggestions about arranging specific
compositions.

Curiously enough, in contradiction to the above
statements, many take up art late in life merely as a hobby,
and do very credible work. Business men in various parts of
the country have formed clubs for the study and practice of
art; and the quality which the members often produce is
surprisingly good.

The study and practice of art is much like the study and
practice of anything else. Any subject should be reduced to
its simplest elements first, then the lesser contributing factors
should be studied and analyzed. Like gathering the materials
to build a house, the factors in art are gathered from many
sources. Yet it should be understood that while influences
and principles in art are derived from different sources they
are brought together for one purpose only: to form an
artistic unity in the finished picture.

Putting the matter of study and training briefly, talent
or natural ability must first exist. All information,
suggestions and other forms of instruction are intended to
preserve naturalness in expression and at the same time
create a quality that will fulfill all requirements of esthetic
enjoyment.

The first objective in study is to develop or expand the
individual’s native ability; the next is the enjoyment in
depiction, and finally, the ultimate purpose of art is for the
benefit of humanity in general. Before this altruistic purpose
can be fulfilled, however, pictures must have visual as
well as the finer abstract qualities which fully exercise the
esthetic pleasures.

The artist must be really qualified. He must enjoy
nature, art and be in tune with beauty, nature and life. He
needs to feel rhythmic influences and respond to emotional
impulses. This does not signify weakness but, rather,
strength. The artist’s strength, outside of talent, are in
imagination and emotions. Weakness lies in the inability to
respond to these and the anticipation of reward.

The natural instincts or imagination needs to be guided
by reason, at least to some extent. Reason is also supposed to
be an inherent faculty. Whatever may be said against logic or
common sense in the theory of art or in the training of
natural ability, the fact remains that no artistic quality can
come into being without some degree of sound judgment.
Using reason to guide the natural impulses develops the
artist’s taste, judgment and his instinctive feeling for quality.
These powers, skill with paint and the artist’s enjoyment in
depiction are the things that decide the value of his work to
the advancement of art generally.

The worth of any picture is exactly the worth of the
artist’s ability to develop his instinctive judgment, to respond
to his natural impulses and to use some measure of
intelligence in the process.

Between the forces of impulses and reason each painter
must develop an individual viewpoint and assert his
independence. Before he can create artistic quality which
ultimately benefits humanity in general, he must first set
himself apart, so to speak, and become independent in
thought and action. He must detach himself from all
influence of his fellow beings so that he may fully enjoy
his depiction in order that his fellow beings, whom he
has set aside, may ultimately enjoy the result of his
artistic experience.

The pleasure of picturizing and appreciation go hand in
hand in the development of art. Both contribute their share
of influences. Artistic expression would be of little value
were it not for responsive appreciation. Between these
influences art fulfills all of its purposes.

Striking a balance between influences is the main
abstract factor in artistic procedure. The fact that there
is no way of measuring any of the quantities or influences
is the reason art is such a difficult subject to write about
or teach. This is also one reason, perhaps the main one,
why art has always been and perhaps always will be, a subject
of controversy.

The fact that fine art is dependent on many ideas,
different mannerisms and in untold instances of instinctive
judgment in gauging visual as well as abstract measures, all
make it a subject of many seeming and actual contradictions.

In both theory and practice of art, one factor is apt
to interlope on the field of another and either partially or
wholly destroy the latter’s importance. Perhaps in the next
instance there is a reversal and the last factor overly
influences the first factor.

The balancing of influences or judging between forces
is a problem for the beginner, the advanced student and
the experienced painter. Every beginner should remember
that he, as well as those who are more competent, has
much the same problems and that only experience can
make a solution just a little easier. Moreover, solving any
problem does not depend on how much the individual knows
or how much he practices. But it does depend on his
ability to instinctively feel the measures or judge the
quantity between factors or influences that have direct
bearing on each particular condition, circumstance or
picturization.

The study of art does not consist in accumulating a lot
of facts merely for the purpose of carrying around a mental
encyclopedia. The purpose of reason or knowledge is to
guide imagination and invention in reducing ideal mental
concepts into pictorial realities. “Theory is the guide,
practice the ratification and life of theory.” Appreciation,
imagination, natural impulses and reason combine to form
theories or concepts. These, even with the element of logic,
are not always practical. Then again some degree of reason
must come to guide the hand in producing a practical visual
reality. Logic is needed in studying the theory and purpose of
art; in forming concepts of pictorial plans and in building
the actual picture.

Abstract quality comes from nobility in thought,
intuitive judgment plus good craftsmanship or skill in
building the picture. Such analysis is sound reasoning.
Beauty in both the abstract concept and concrete visual
structure is essential. The ideology must be complete.
Unworthy ideas or gross errors in painting are always
disturbing and unforgivable.

Discord in any composition, assuming all faculties
competent, can only originate from two main causes:
misjudgment in the concept or mistakes in applying drawing
mediums or pigment. However, there might be other
underlying causes. On occasions, for instance, when the mind
or body are not in condition to depict. The painter may be
unwell or tired. Again, over-concentration might cause the
judgment to be poor or at times things do not look right
for no apparent reason. In all such cases one thing only can
be done and that is the artist should occupy himself with
something far removed from painting for a while.

Good work is only possible when circumstances allow
all faculties to function properly. Therefore, those overly
ambitious souls should take heed and realize that art can not
be forced, but comes naturally and easily only when the right
conditions exist. Enjoyment in painting should never be
overwhelmed by ambition. The latter has its worth but not at
the expense of the former. Ambition should be directed more
toward developing the artistic faculties than toward the pro-
duction of pictures. It is not the size or number of paintings
but the degree of ability that counts.

The appreciation of paintings is a source of real help to
any student, not so much from analysis but from an incentive
standpoint. However, appreciation should not extend to the
point of overwhelming admiration or downright worship.
The student should not lose his identity and seek to imitate.

The pleasure derived from viewing the achievements of
others, coupled with a true appreciation of nature, sharpens
the desire to express pictorially. Each sketch or picture stud-
ied or painted adds more and more to enjoyment, confidence
and satisfaction. There is no greater pleasure than that
derived from creative work, although before this can be full
and complete, much study, analysis, research and work are
in order.

Besides appreciation and the development of talent the
student needs to respect natural laws, truths, principles, tra-
dition and precedent. He must also have perseverance, deter-
mination to achieve, and enthusiasm in study and depiction.
The beginner should learn to instinctively judge between all
influences; to use good taste in selection; the importance of
simplicity in composition; good drawing as well as approxi-
mately related values, harmony and balance in color and
recessional effects. While there may be many ideas as to the
definition of these visual qualities, the definitions are not
unlimited. Art is capable of expressing infinite ideas through
an infinite variation of mannerisms, yet visual quality is
somewhat more restricted in definition. Visual quality in
artistic work can always be described or defined without
restricting definition to a narrow scope.

The fundamental principles of art and the words and
terms which describe these essentials form the alphabet of
the artistic language. While many ideas may be interpreted
through art and many translations made of tis principles,
there is understanding enough to allow for the development
of originality within the flexibility or principles and their
definition.

Seeking information to develop his natural abilities is
the first duty of the student. At the same time this is the first
and possibly the greatest problem. With all of the various
opinions on art and the many contradicting statements, it is
very likely that he will be very much confused before he has
formed any general ideas of what it is all about.

Of greatest importance to any student, when he has
gleaned his information from every conceivable source, is to
calmly sit down and meditate on the problems of art and its
many angles, then form his own ideas, In all of the various
opinions expressed on art at least some material should have
agreement enough to form a basis from which to make a
beginning.

The student has ample opportunity for the study of var-
ious ways in which other artists have handled the problem of
painting. In the large list of paintings and reproductions to
be seen and the many books to be read he always has the
authority for any main idea or principle he might consider.
He may employ the same principles used by others, yet, if he
fosters an individual viewpoint, originality will prevail. He
will in time create equally meritorious work, provided he has
studied and practiced as others have done.

Let it be said once more that individuality in thought,
respect for nature, established truths and principles is one
road that can lead to true original artistic expression. There
may be other means but they have not been found and it is
doubtful if they ever will.

Unity is possible in pictorial composition only through
the observance of the principles that create it. Therefore,
knowledge of fundamentals is the important matter to be
considered. We cannot have too much knowledge of artistic
essentials. Principles are always the basis of study and prac-
tice. These fundamentals are lasting, greater and more
constructive than personal ideas or opinions. Unless
personal ideas are in conformity with basic principles we had
best ignore them.

Most of the problems in painting can be solved and
originality achieved when we have a broad knowledge and
respect for the purpose and importance of principles. A
familiarity with artistic essentials does not lessen their value
or evoke disrespect for these factors. As a matter of fact, art
and its principles is one of the very few subjects that will
stand an unlimited amount of familiarity without producing
an aversion to the subject in question.

The more we know of art and its factors, the greater our
respect and admiration.

Whenever we see a fine painting we thoroughly appre-
ciate the accomplishment of the artist. We admire his
wisdom in selection and concept; his skill and ingenuity in
execution. We know that genius, ability, perseverance and
determination have contributed toward his artistic success —
that he only succeeded by an endless study of fundamentals
and by continually staying with each problem until it
was mastered.

The study of art does not consist in continually
searching for something new in the way of principles but
rather in an intensive analysis of old principles. When the
purpose and flexibility of principles is understood it is
easier to form new ideas and translations built upon these
very essentials.

Many students feel that once they learn the main factors
they can set them aside and search for something new —
some new secret that will make artistic procedure easy. This
is a mistake. The fundamental principles should always be
kept foremost in mind and studied over and over again.

Whenever a new idea comes along it should be
compared with principles that govern it. If the idea is
constructive, it will conform to fundamental principles; if
not, the idea should be abandoned. Selection and rejection
is important in all phases of art — even in choosing or
discarding ideas.

A new idea may either make or spoil an arrangement.
The determining factor of a new idea is, does it strengthen or
weaken the composition? Therefore, each new idea must be
sound and easily integrate into the organization of the other
parts in the unity and not be a disturbing note. Unless each
idea, mark or brush stroke creates and preserves this unity,
the harmony is disturbed and some major fundamental has
been obviously violated.

Yet no student should ever be discouraged with such
mistakes for they are part of the profession. The art of
painting is a matter of seeing mistakes, overcoming obstacles
and keeping fundamental principles always at hand. No one
is ever so proficient that he can entirely ignore errors,
side-step obstacles and forget principles.

Although we may vary our ideas or translate each
principle differently, we should at all times have a thorough
understanding and conviction concerning the primary
purpose of each artistic factor, We should study and analyze
the principles and their purpose. Each principle has an
especial place in the unity of the picture, though in each
picture these principles may be applied in any one of their
infinite variations.

The essence of each principle is its main idea which may
employ one or more of its variations to create one given
quality. How to apply this idea to suit each particular picture
is a problem for the individual student and not a problem for
his advisor.

When suggestions about art and its factors are listed
separately, the matter of artistic understanding appears
tremendous. The means of achieving artistic quality are
varied and many. But the purpose of all items is toward
a single purpose, namely unity or harmony in the ultimate
picture.

Principles have to do chiefly with the mental approach
in art.

The mechanics in painting are best improved when the
mind is trained and disciplined. Actual painting is always
governed by the mental, emotional and imaginative faculties.
Therefore, these factors should be developed and coordin-
ated with manual practice. The student should have an
insatiable desire to collect all possible information, then
consolidate this information in forming hiw own convictions.

The first and last important matter in the study and
practice of art is knowledge.

In acquiring this knowledge, serious thought, analysis
and meditation is needed. A general idea of the purely
esthetic purpose of art must be formed before we can hope to
understand and employ the means by which artistic quality
is created.
