Edgar Payne - Composition in Outdoor Painting

CHAPTER III
TYPES OF COMPOSITION

Compositional stems in pictures sever the same purpose
as armatures in sculpture.

Perhaps from a pencil sketch, or small model, the
sculptor conceives his main construction base — the arma-
ture. With iron pipe and wire he builds his central supporting
framework, indicating the proportions and direction of the
main lines or angles of the plan. To this foundation he adds
the principal masses, and finally the smaller planes or more
subtle modeling. Then, too, like the painter, the sculptor may
cover the foundation, but he cannot entirely conceal his
foundation form. True, the armature cannot be seen, but we
know it is there from the general arrangement. As a matter
of fact, in sculpture this stem is a concrete reality, while in
painting merely its principle is observed. The symbol in
pictorial composition is considered as an imaginary form
and is not drawn mechanically.

If any one, in the beginning of study, will set himself to
study the various compositional forms, then experiment and
practice with variations of them, he will find that his instinc-
tive taste is developed; and subjects will in time lend them-
selves easily to his feeling for unity, and soon he may be able
to forget all about them.

It must never be forgotten and let this be most strongly
emphasized — that the dominant aim of the student should
be to train and equip himself to the point where he can judge
unity and all of its contributing factors by “feeling.”

If he confines himself to the study that will develop this
faculty, rather than trying to create unity before he knows
how, he will realize that although this appears the longest
road it is really the shortest. The more thought and concen-
tration put into his preparation, the easier will be the
procedure and the finer the design.

The mechanical stems shown in the pages illustrate the
various basic forms which underlie picture construction.
They suggest the manner of approach to unification —
nothing more. All such symbols seek to hide their identity
lest they appear too obvious or encroach upon the all-
important factor of originality in concept. Here again enters
the activity occasioned by opposing forces, the weighing and
balancing between conventional form and the freedom of
natural impulses and imagination. Although the latter may
need guidance, they must not be unduly influenced or
restricted by attempting to make rigid rules out of flexible
principles. On the other hand, while a particular form of
arrangement needs disguising, it is seldom, if ever, that this
is entirely possible. Furthermore, it is a question whether
complete concealment is essential or intended. Some
evidence is bound to remain.

It is doubtful if anyone can create unity without consid-
ering some principle. It is equally doubtful if anyone can
completely obliterate all signs of such instruments.

Many painters emphatically decide against the idea of
typical forms or stems in composition, yet practically all of
them unconsciously use all of the conventional plans.

With all that may be said against typical compositional
forms, the fact remains that the approaches to pictorial unity
are limited. What is unlimited, however, is the variation in
these forms. The number of picture plans that may be
derived from the generally accepted types of arranging is
beyond comprehension.

When the principles or typical forms are considered,
they are excellent crutches for any student when he is
forming his ideas for creating unity. It is well, though, to
consider them as supports only — temporary expedients —
to be used during the training period, or in emergencies when
instinctive judgment fails to function.

Each conception and every pictorial design originates
from a thought or an idea. Compositional plans, or the
typical stems, are what we borrow from tradition. How much
we vary these, or how much of our own thought we put into
translating the principle of each is dependent on how well we
can balance the influence of natural impulses and influence
of conventions.

If any view presents qualities that stimulate a desire
to express, a small pictorial idea is all we need for the
compositional plan. The greatest pictures are often built
upon the simplest suggestion. We may take a plan used by
others, seek a similar composition in nature and from these
two authorities build an entirely new and original picture.
This does not mean that we imitate nature or the other
painter, only translate both the plan and the view.

The small pen and ink sketches in the illustrations are
intended merely as ideas to be translated in variation. The
sketches of paintings by different artists are in no sense exact
reproductions — they are only broad ideas of the plans upon
which each painting is based.

It is a very good practice for every student to make a
collection of reproductions of paintings; hundreds can be
accumulated. A large variety of compositional plans is a
liberal education to anyone studying art. Seeing the pictorial
ideas of others gives confidence and encouragement, and
a respect for the profession of artist. Practical ideas on
composition and its forms are also to be found in many good
books on the market.

Henry R. Poore, in his excellent volume on composition,
illustrates seven main stems of arrangement and describes
their variation as well as different forms of unity in
reproduced paintings. Other authorities set forth diverse
pictorial plans. A general list of the principal forms or stems
of composition are described on the illustration plates as:
The Steelyard, The Balance Scale, The Circle or O, The S or
Compound Curve, The Pyramid or Triangle, The Cross, The
Radiating Line, The Ell or Rectangular, the Suspended
Steelyard, The Three Spot, The Group Mass, The Diagonal
Line, The Tunnel, The Silhouette, The Pattern. This listing is
at random and not necessarily by the importance of each
type. In studying composition we should not consider one
approach better than another but study and experiment with
each and every one. At the same time it is well to improvise
without considering any particular form of arrangement.

The illustration plates show the principles of composi-
tion in pictorial form. Where the type is not named, a
symbol from which each may be derived can be seen below
each sketch. This symbol or worded description is by no
means a strict definition of the type or types from which each
composition is built. Some of the arrangements may be
derived from or influenced by compositional stems not
indicated. Like translating principles in painting pictures,
each individual may translate differently when analyzing
completed compositions.

STEELYARD, PLATE XVII

The steelyard is probably the most popular and possibly
the simplest form of balance in general use. The illustrative
symbol consists of a bar resting on a bar or fulcrum, the
largest weight resting on the shortest end of the bar and
closest to the fulcrum, while the smallest weight rests on or
near the long end of the bar. The natural placement of a
point of interest would be on or near the theoretical fulcrum,
or near the main weight. In some cases the main weight or
mass, or group of masses, may be the chief attraction. Tn this
event there is usually some connecting link between this main
weight and the lesser one. This may be an actual line or edge,
or merely space. In the latter instance, the small items may be
placed to make a more definite indication of a
pathway for the eye.

The steelyard type of arrangement suggests the use of
main vertical and horizontal line with an opportunity to
utilize the curved or slanting lines to give variety, support
and interception.

The steelyard principle of weights is indicative of
near-related values. The lesser weight should be somewhat
the same value or color as the larger one in order to produce
repetition and to relate these unequal quantities. The two
main masses need not be placed on a balanced lateral level;
one may rest on ground more in the middle distance or
distance. Composition often needs third dimensional balance
as well as lateral balance.

The steelyard, like most of the other plans, has a wide
scope — infinite variation. It also may be combined with or
changed into another form — such as the circle or pyramid
— by placement of other objects or masses.

Having no actual rule to measure distance between the
two main weights, in this form of balance, once again we
have an unknown quantity determined only by instinct
within a variable interval of space. To produce the artistic
equivalent here, the artist can only depend on his intuitive
sense of artistic balance. Attempts have been made to set
down certain proportionate measures. These might work in
one or two instances, but habitually using the same formula
would defeat artistic purposes. The steelyard or its influence
can be seen in the works of Turner, Daubigny, East and
Thiebault on Plate IJ, also in the designs by Thomas, Millet,
Manet, Monet, Rousseau, East and Corot on Plate IV.
On Plate VI the arrangement by Borg suggests the steelyard
as do the pictures by William Wendt and Ben Foster on
Plate III.

THE BALANCE SCALE, PLATE XVII

The balance scale is not particularly adapted to outdoor
painting. However, it may sometimes be used in mountain
pictures where the main peak is placed near the top center,
with trees or other objects in the two lower corners.
Sometimes, too, in a purely decorative style where formality
is needed the balance scale principle may be invoked also.
This type of composition lends itself admirably to wall dec-
oration or mural work where formal balance corresponds to
the equal measures of architecture.

CIRCLE, PLATE XVII

Next to the steelyard in practicability and popularity is
the O or circle approach to arrangement. It generally offers a
pretty sure method of achieving unity, provided the main
opening or space is kept dominant. It may be described as a
roughly indicated rounded, rectangular or irregular opening.
The sides of this opening may be formed by line, mass or
edge. The circle idea may be shown in perspective by an
oblong space or by an oval. In fact, the circular is any
arrangement where the eye will travel around a considerable
area in the central portion of the canvas. Usually the chief
attraction is the main opening or some certain spot within it.
In the latter instance it should not be in the exact center, but
near the boundaries of the opening, or crossing on to or
wholly on the main pathway of the circular observation.
(Plate XII.) The circular type can be derived from the steel-
yard pyramid or the three spot; it is naturally much the same
as the tunnel.

Easily discerned circular forms can be seen in the
pictures of Turner, Rousseau and Constable on Plate II. Here
also may be observed the circle influence in the work of
Harpignies and Vicat Cole. George Elmer Browne’s arrange-
ment on Plate V is decidedly build on the circle idea, while
Bellows on the same plate is only slightly influenced, as is the
picture by Chauncey Ryder. The composition by Nichols,
Garber, Carlson, Metcalf and Rungius on Plate VI also show
the influence of a circular observation.

In Brangwyn’s windmill composition on Plate IV may
be seen a somewhat unusual example of the circular idea.
Here, too, is an interesting solution of line opposition.

The circle plan often assumes a kind of U influence.

In fact, this formation is seen so much in nature it might be
considered a distinct type of composition. The lateral
ground planes nearly always exist in outdoor pictures, and
when rather large vertical plans are seen on either side, the
U idea is suggested. The picture by George Elmer Browne,
Plate V, Constable, Plate IJ, and Wendt on Plate III, each
show this U influence.

S OR COMPOUND CURVE, PLATE XVII

The S or compound curve is virtually in a field of its
own. Generally it is suggested more by line or edge than
mass. This type is usually applicable in picturing rivers,
arroyos, or roads viewed from high station point. However
it is useful whenever the main line or main group of lines
suggests compound curves. The dominant curves and
slanting lines in this type generally suggest grace and move-
ment and an easy relation of the parts.

If a special point of interest exists, it should be near the
converging end of the main lines, or well placed on the latter.
The S form is closely related to the radiating or converging
line type of composition. Perhaps of all the forms of
arrangement, the S or compound curve idea more easily
resolves itself to rhythmic qualities. With variety in the
curves and some interception from straight verticals and
horizontals, this plan offers an opportunity to secure
harmonious design, especially those of linear influence.

Both strong and light influences of the S type are shown
in the arrangements of King, Nichols, Peters and Lawless on
Plate IJ; Symons, Bellows, Jack Smith, Putnuff, and
Hibbard on Plate VI.

PYRAMID, PLATE VIII

The pyramid or triangle suggests stability or perma-
nence because of its structure. It may be describe by line,
mass or spottings. The pyramidal form may be placed toward
either side of the canvas. If the form is large, it may be
merged into group mass or silhouette type, or it may be
transformed into the steelyard by placing it to one side and
adding counterbalances of smaller items; or, objects may be
placed along its main lines, creating a circular observation.
If a true pyramid is placed near the center of the canvas and
the forms are rather close-knit or solid, it is likely to have
too much stability. Therefore the plan should only roughly
indicate a triangular pathway for the eye, rather than a solid
mass from which one would have to seek a pathway to
distance on one side or the other. The triangle easily
combines with the grouped mass or circle types. The
triangular influence may be seen in the design by Rousseau,
Van Marcke and Cazin on Plate IV, Dougherty on Plate III
and Lauritz on Plate V.

THE CROSS, PLATE XVIII

The cross is not particularly useful in outdoor work.
However, it may be sometimes used in architectural motives,
boats or leafless trees. The chief consideration is that a small
point of interest needs to be placed near the intersection of
the main lines; the cross is somewhat like the converging line.

THE RADIATING LINE, PLATE XVIII

The radiating or converging line organization generally
presents a direct simple method, calling the attention to the
main area of interest, or what Henry R. Poore calls the
principality. The normal place for the main point of interest
in this plan of composition is at or near the converging point
of the main lines. Some views have roads, fences, streams, the
edges of clouds or the horizon that leads the glance to the
apex of their lines. Linear perspective of buildings sometimes
may form this type of planning. The tunnel and circle forms
may embody radiating lines that lead through their main
openings. However, if converging lines are strong or well-
defined in the view, they may, in the picture, need some stiff
interference such as secondary interest, opposition or
concealment. The glance must not travel to speedily, which it
will if the general plan appears to be forced by an obvious
spoke-like design. All lines should be irregular, broken or
intercepted.

The influence of radiating line is evident in the designs
of Peters and Folinsbee on Plate III, and Schofield on Plate
V. Jourdan, Richmond and Thiebault on Plate IT also show
some indication of converging line.

ELL OR RECTANGULAR, PLATE XVIII

Although the ell or rectangular is somewhat similar to
the steelyard, some artists consider it a separate form, yet
only in rare instances it is possible to balance one large
upright main mass with merely a lateral plane. The ell can
easily combine with the steelyard or radiating line.
Sometimes a special small interest, such as a figure, may
balance a large weight; or again, variety interest in the
ground planes, distance or sky spaces may balance the main
upright mass in the ell type of arrangement.

SUSPENDED STEELYARD, PLATE XIX

Although it may be obscure or seem far-fetched, the sus-
pended steelyard may aid unification, especially where the
subjects are located on a high horizon and the foreground is
simple. In many respects it is analogous to the steelyard and
the same principles of unequal measures may be employed.
The fulcrum is the suspension point. The natural place for
the main interest is near this point.

In the upper righthand corner of Plate XIV is an impro-
vised sketch with the suspended steelyard idea combined
with the circular motive.

THREE SPOT, PLATE XIX

The three spot idea may be used as a separate form of
composition or the mass placement may indicate some other
form of arrangement, such as the steelyard or pyramid. The
principle of the three spot originates more from a natural law
of vision, rather than mechanical picture construction stem.
Two objects or masses, even though they are unequally
placed upon the picture areas, will not create unity, but place
a third mass and the observation becomes better.

In outdoor pictures, the figurative foundation is the flat
ground in the near part of the picture. In many cases, the two
main masses may be in the foreground and the third higher
up. This naturally suggests the circle, the pyramid or the
triangle principle. However, the three spot idea does not
demand such placement. The main spots may be placed
anywhere on the surface and the lesser ones indicated where
they will best balance. All this does not mean to say that
there shall not be more than three spots or masses. Three is
the minimum; the painter may use as many as he needs for
balance or unification.

In addition to the three spot being a form of arrange-
ment nearly all pictures have three small points of attraction.
These may include the chief interest or they may not. If they
do not include the main interest, they are usually more the
result of accident than intention, yet they will be there. These
may be small or large bits of pure color or value contrasts, an
edge, or any other items. One needs only to glance with the
eyes squinted at any picture, and these will appear.

Of course, in deliberately using the three spot idea as a
form of composition, the eye will naturally gravitate first to
the three largest masses. These form the chief stem of the
arrangement. When the three main “spottings” of values are
once placed so that good balance is achieved, the lesser
values and contrasts should merely strengthen or maintain
this balance in its larger sense.

The principle of three spots applies to large strong
contrasts as well as to large value areas. One large contrast
such as in the silhouette type of composition should be
balanced by at least two others. However though contrasts
are effective and generally necessary in composing, they are
more of an accessory to value areas rather than being main
items in the compositional plan.

The three spot principle is brought out quite strongly
in Manet’s boat scene and Monet’s haystacks on Plate IV.
Its slight influence can be seen in Brangwyn’s windmill on
Plate IV, Jourdan’s picture on Plate JJ, and Grigwire’s
design on Plate VI also shows consideration for the three
spot principle.

GROUPED MASS, PLATE XIX

Unity may be achieved by placing several masses into a
larger group. However, this usually requires that the main
group be of considerable size and contain a variety of form,
values and color within its boundaries. Usually it demands,
also, that the main contours suggest stability. This naturally
suggests a leaning towards the pyramid or silhouette. Being
an isolation problem, the main mass is usually situated on
one or two fields of medium light values which, of course,
may contain some variation in line, color or values, though
these are not of sufficient strength to interfere with the
main group.

The principle of group mass is the chief compositional
form used in painting still life. The practice, of painting still
life, is incidentally, of the greatest advantage to the painter
of either outdoor or indoor subjects. It is particularly fine
discipline for those who paint the landscape or growing
things outdoors. The grouping of trees and other growths
into compact areas with consistent variety is a pretty sure
method of producing simplicity in the design.

The group mass idea is generally quite a safe plan to
achieve unity. Its compactness calls immediate attention to
the work. Good examples are to be seen in the pictures by
Parrish, Nichols, C. L. A. Smith, Dougherty and Wendt on
Plate III. Also Albert Ryder, Waugh, Vincent, Keith and
Lauritz on Plate V.

Sometimes the group mass plan can be effective when
more of an accessory to value areas rather than being main
items in the compositional plan.

The three spot principle is brought out quite strongly
in Manet’s boat scene and Monet’s haystacks on Plate IV.
Its slight influence can be seen in Brangwyn’s windmill on
Plate IV, Jourdan’s picture on Plate II, and Grigwire’s
design on Plate VI also shows consideration for the three
spot principle.

GROUPED MASS, PLATE XIX

Unity may be achieved by placing several masses into a
larger group. However, this usually requires that the main
group be of considerable size and contain a variety of form,
values and color within its boundaries. Usually it demands,
also, that the main contours suggest stability. This naturally
suggests a leaning towards the pyramid or silhouette. Being
an isolation problem, the main mass is usually situated on
one or two fields of medium light values which, of course,
may contain some variation in line, color or values, though
these are not of sufficient strength to interfere with the
main group.

The principle of group mass is the chief compositional
form used in painting still life. The practice, of painting still
life, is incidentally, of the greatest advantage to the painter
of either outdoor or indoor subjects. It is particularly fine
discipline for those who paint the landscape or growing
things outdoors. The grouping of trees and other growths
into compact areas with consistent variety is a pretty sure
method of producing simplicity in the design.

The group mass idea is generally quite a safe plan to
achieve unity. Its compactness calls immediate attention to
the work. Good examples are to be seen in the pictures by
Parrish, Nichols, C. L. A. Smith, Dougherty and Wendt on
Plate [JI. Also Albert Ryder, Waugh, Vincent, Keith and
Lauritz on Plate V.

Sometimes the group mass plan can be effective when
combined with several of the other types, the pattern and
silhouette particularly. This combination can be seen in the
works of Keith, Waugh, Albert Ryder, Vincent and Borg on
Plate V, also in the designs by Hanson and Thieme on Plate
VI and Parrish and Wendt on Plate III.

DIAGONAL LINE, PLATE XX

Some writers on composition include the diagonal line
base. In general substance it is described as a main line or
series of lines running from near the upper lefthand corner
to the lower right, although there need be no reason why the
line should not extend from the upper right to the lower left,
unless it be for the unaccountable fact that the first method
is the natural inclination. With a considerable slant in the
main line, the next move is to oppose or intercept these by
other lines or masses. The diagonal line may be handled in a
manner similar to the steelyard principle — that is, two
objects may intercept near the upper and lower terminals.
Either small or large forms may be placed at the discretion of
the painter.

Owing to the eye-carrying power of strong diagonal
lines, strength is needed in verticals or opposing slanted lines;
the latter may often call for almost right angle conjunctions
(these are the stiffest opposition). The area below the main
diagonal lines is usually suggestive of strong mass values and
solidity. This necessitates some secondary interest in the
lighter area above the line, which, in the average view, could
be in the sky. However, this scheme may be reversed with the
upper areas in dark or heavy masses, while the lower areas
are in light. For instance the main lower area might represent
a slope covered with sand or snow in extremely light values
and the upper parts dark thick pines or other trees.

The diagonal line motive in Courbet’s work on Plate IV
stands out quite strongly. Its influence is apparent also in the
pictures by Symons on Plate V; Folinsbee on Plate JII.

THE TUNNEL, PLATE XX

Although similar to the circle, some authorities
consider the tunnel or tunnel-like form separately since it
usually depends on perspective lines or planes rather than a
one main circular observation.

In substance, this plan suggests a view through a tunnel-
like series of arches, squares or irregular construction,
surrounding three or four sides with the exit or main interest
in an opening beyond the diminishing framework.

Europe, with its quaint old structures, narrow streets
and bridges, offers suggestions for this plan of arrangement,
although geographic location need have little to do with
any type or form. We have in America ample opportunity
to use this form in doorways, archways and _ thickly-
wooded areas.

Pathways through forests are often seen with the trunks
of trees dwindling in size as they recede; overhanging
branches and foliage form archways through which may be
seen the opening beyond. The path and foliage may often be
sprinkled with sunlight and shadows, lending variety and
secondary interest to a possible interest through the main
opening beyond.

The tunnel appealed to Whistler and Brangwyn. They
created many fine designs built upon this principle, as have
many other artists. The tunnel-like principle can be seen in
the design by Hans Heysen on Plate IV, also in
the composition of Rousseau on Plate IJ. Some slight indica-
tion of the tunnel idea can be seen in Ben Foster’s picture on
Plate III.

THE SILHOUETTE, PLATE XX

The silhouette is one of the rare types of composition —
that is, insofar as outdoor painting is concerned. It is much
the same as grouped mass; in fact, it should nearly always
embody variation of shade and form in the main areas. The
chief principle of the silhouette is subordinating interest
and contrast inside the grouped mass to interest in contours.
This interest in contrasting edges or contours is generally
heightened by interchange of values. Interchange adds
strength and charm to any composition especially the
silhouette. Extremely dark values extending onto extremely
light areas is one of the main supports in the silhouette type
of arrangement.

While large grouped masses are needed in the silhouette
approach, the contrasting edges claim dominance. This
dominance is aided in many cases by the principle of
graduated values from the middle shades to their extreme
intensity near the contact of the edge of a value of opposite
intensity.

Again, isolated masses of extreme dark or light may
be placed on field of their opposites, or on areas of the half-
tone or intermediate shades. These isolated masses, whether
grouped or single, should have their values simplified
or brought close together in order to preserve a strong
silhouette.

Any arrangement depending on the silhouette demands
that particular stress be placed on drawing, especially in the
contrasting edges of contours, as errors stand out strongly
and may spoil an otherwise good arrangement.

The silhouette plan is well adapted to a decorative style
in painting where contours are more stressed than modeling
or recession. It also presents fine opportunity for creating
rhythm through line or edges.

The silhouette types of composition generally embody
the idea of interchange. For instance, in the work of Manet,
Rousseau and Cazin on Plate IV, Hanson and Thieme on
Plate VI, show the influence of this principle. It can be seen
also in the picture of Jourdan on Plate II, as well as in the
pictures by Albert Ryder, Vincent and Browne on Plate V.
The silhouette form may merge into still another plan which,
for want of a better name, may be called the pattern.

THE PATTERN, PLATE XX

The pattern, being more of an abstract principle than
the other types, is possibly the most ideal. Since it calls for no
geometric stem, it must depend entirely on the feeling for
unity. While it is the most ideal, it is at the same time the
most difficult, the reason being it has no special form. Its
dependence is mainly on imagination or ingenuity or an
instinctive feeling for harmony when it appears in nature.
This is a good type for experimentation, as it tests the faculty
of feeling for unification and at the same time discourages
too much reliance on the more conventional forms. Pattern
design offers also opportunities for practice with purely
imaginative notes and plans. Allover patterns may be
arranged with or without a special spot for interest.

By ingenuity and this plan, the artist may cover an entire
canvas with a finely woven design and still have dimensional
effects and unity. After all composition or a unified design is
the goal regardless of the approach. The more the painter
can feel and appreciate the quality coming from a pleasing
unification, the less he needs to consider any particular type
or form. However, in order to develop this faculty, he needs
to study and experiment with all forms of arrangement and
not become too methodical in organizing his designs.

The pattern idea may be seen in the works of Harpignes
on Plate II, Kenyon Cox, C. L. A. Smith and Parrish on Plate
IJ, Van Marcke and Brangwyn on Plate IV, Jack W. Smith,
Vincent, Schofield, Puthuff, Waugh, Bellows and Keith on
Plate V. The influence of the pattern can be seen in the
designs of Johnson, Nichols and Ritschel on Plate VI.

Throughout the illustrations will be found ideas upon
which American and European artists have built their
pictures. Other ideas may be seen in the improvised sketches.
Many of the plans in each group are derived mainly from one
of the types just described, while in other plans the influence
of several forms may be seen. In still other instances scarcely
any evidence of a foundation stem is evident.

Compositional plans, like all other factors or principles
in art, are so flexible and interlocking it is difficult in some
cases and impossible in others to segregate each in a distinct
classification. For instance, the pyramid might be similar to
the group mass, the three spot, or very near the steelyard.
The radiating line might be much the same as the S or circle,
group mass or steelyard, ell or cross. Again, the circle could
embody the tunnel, steelyard, S, pyramid, or others. The
pattern is quite elastic; it may stand alone or be related to any
of the types or it might disregard all of them. Since it
depends almost entirely on a feeling for balance, the pattern
idea is rather a haven of refuge when we cannot decide on a
particular typical plan for arrangement.

The first and last thing to consider is the instinctive
feeling for balance. The more this can be exercised, the more
pleasing will be the harmony.

The various symbols or the types of composition are
perhaps the only practical means of developing the sense of
instinctive feeling for unity. These typical stems are designed
for this purpose and no other. Therefore, the suggestion to
the student is to study, analyze and experiment with all of the
foundation stems until his faculties are fully developed, and
then forget them as much as possible.

Compositional stems are not a measure or standard
to judge procedure or the finished picture. Typical stems
have their place and importance in selection, rejection and
composing but in the final analysis instinctive taste and
judgment is the sole authority. When we intuitively feel
unity, artistic quality results, but when we consciously
depend on a compositional form, or attempt to feature a typ-
ical stem, the arrangement loses at least some quality.
Compositional stems are merely the means of developing
instinctive taste and appreciation.

The enjoyment or appreciation of fine composition is
the first artistic requirement. When we can truly appreciate
harmonious arrangement we can better understand the
means that produced it. The appreciation of quality or
beauty in nature and art is always an inherent instinct though
development of esthetic judgment is often necessary.

Compositional stems should be considered as a means
to an end rather than an objective in themselves. Therefore,
compositional stems should be valued only for their place
and limitations — then utilized with a happy anticipation of
their worth and possibilities.
